find differently laid down in different Charts, both in Name and
Situation.

The variation of the Compass off the West Coast of Java is about 3
degrees West, which Variation continues, without any sencible difference
in the Common Track of Ships, to the Longitude of 288 degrees West,
Latitude 22 degrees 0 minutes South. After this it begins to increase
apace, in so much that in the Longitude of 295 degrees, Latitude 23
degrees, the Variation was 10 degrees 20 minutes West; in 7 degrees more
of Longitude and one of Latitude it increased 2 degrees; in the same
space farther to the West it increased 5 degrees; in the Latitude of 28
degrees and Longitude 314 degrees it was 24 degrees 20 minutes; in the
Latitude 29 degrees and Longitude 317 degrees it was 26 degrees 10
minutes, and continued to be much the same for the space of 10 degrees
farther to the West; but in the Latitude of 34 degrees, Longitude 333
degrees we observed it twice to be 28 1/4 degrees West; but this was the
greatest Variation we observed, for in the Latitude of 35 1/2 degrees,
Longitude 337 degrees, it was 24 degrees, and continued decreasing, so
that of Cape Laguillas it was 22 degrees 30 minutes and in Table Bay it
was 20 degrees 30 minutes West.

From what I have observed of the Current it doth not appear that they are
at all considerable until you draw near the Meridian of Madagascar, for
after we had made 52 degrees of Longitude from Java head we found, by
observation, our Error in Longitude was only 2 degrees, and it was the
same when we had made only 19 degrees. This Error might be owing partly
to a Current setting to the Westward, or, what I thought most likely,
that we did not make sufficient allowance for the set of the Sea before
when we run, and, lastly, the assum'd Longitude of Java head might be
wrong. If any Error lays there it Arises from the imperfection of the
Charts I made use of in reducing the Longitude from Batavia to the above
mentioned Head, for it cannot be doubted but the Longitude of Batavia is
well Determined. After we had passed the Longitude of 307 degrees we
began to find the Effects of the Westerly Currents, for in 3 days our
Error in Longitude was 1 degree 5 minutes; its Velocity kept increasing
as we got to the Westward, in so much that for 5 days successively, after
we had made the land, we were drove to the South-West or South-West by
West by the Currents not less than 20 Leagues a day; and this continued
until we were within 60 or 70 Leagues of the Cape, where we found the
Current to set sometimes one way and sometimes another, but mostly to the
Westward.

After the Boobies above mentioned left us we saw no more birds till we
got nearly abreast of Madagascar, where, in the Latitude of 27 3/4
degrees, we saw an Albatross. After that time we saw more of these birds
every day, and in greater numbers, together with several other sorts; one
sort about as big as a Duck, of a very Dark brown Colour, with a
yellowish bill. The number of these birds increased upon us as we
approached the Shore. As soon as we got into Soundings we saw Gannets,
which we continued to see as long as we were on the Bank, which stretches
off Laguillas 40 Leagues, and Extends along shore to the Eastward from
Cape False, according to some charts, 160 Leagues; the Extent of this
Bank is not well known, however, it is useful in directing Shipping when
to haul in to make the land.

[At Anchor. Table Bay.]

Saturday, 16th. Variable light Airs all this day. Moor'd the Ship and
Struck Yards and Topmast, and in the morning got all the Sick (28) ashore
to Quarters provided for them, and got off fresh meat and Greens for the
People on board.

Sunday, 17th. In the A.M. sail'd for England the Admiral Pocock, Captain
Riddle, by whom I sent Letters to the Admiralty and Royal Society. About
noon came on a hard, dry Gale from the South-East.

Monday, 18th. In the P.M. anchored in the offing an English Ship, which
proved to be the Houghton Indiaman from Bengal. In the A.M. it fell
moderate, and we began to water the Ship.

Tuesday, 19th. Variable Gentle breezes. All this day employ'd repairing
Sails, Rigging, Watering, etc.

Wednesday, 20th. In the P.M. Sail'd the Houghton Indiaman, who saluted us
with 11 Guns, which Complement we returned; this Ship, during her stay in
India, lost by sickness between 30 and 40 men, and had at this time a
good many down with the Scurvey. Other Ships suffer'd in the same
proportion. Thus we find that Ships which have been little more than 12
months from England have suffer'd as much or more by Sickness than we
have done, who have been out near 3 Times as long. Yet their sufferings
will hardly, if att all, be mentioned or known in England; when, on the
other hand, those of the Endeavour, because the Voyage is uncommon, will
very probable be mentioned in every News Paper, and, what is not
unlikely, with many Additional hardships we never Experienced; for such
are the disposition of men in general in these Voyages that they are
seldom content with the Hardships and Dangers which will naturally occur,
but they must add others which hardly ever had existence but in their
imaginations by magnifying the most Trifling accidents and circumstances
to the greatest Hardships and unsurmountable dangers without the imediate
interposition of Providence, as if the whole merit of the Voyage
consisted in the Dangers and Hardships they underwent, or that real ones
did not hapen often enough to give the mind sufficient anxiety. Thus
Posterity are taught to look upon these Voyages as hazardous to the
highest degree.

Thursday, 21st. Fine Pleasant Weather. Employ'd getting on board water,
overhauling the rigging, and repairing Sails. Sail'd for Batavia a Dutch
Ship.

Friday, 22nd, Saturday, 23rd, Sunday, 24th, Monday, 25th, Tuesday, 26th.
Mostly Fine pleasant weather. On the 23rd compleated our water, after
which I gave as many of the People leave to go on shore to refresh
themselves as could be spared at one time.

Wednesday, 27th. Winds variable and clear. Pleasant weather. Sailed for
Holland 4 Sail Dutch Ships.

Thursday, 28th, Friday, 29th. Ditto weather. Employ'd fixing new Topmast
and Backstays, repairing Sails, etc.

Saturday, 30th. In the P.M. anchor'd here the Duke of Gloucester, English
East India Ship from China. In the Evening a prodigious hard gale of wind
came on at South-East, which continued till about 3 o'clock in the
Morning. During the Gales the Table Mountains and Adjacent Hills were
cap'd with Extraordinary while Clouds; the remainder of the Day light
Airs and pleasant weather.

Sunday, 31st. Clear pleasant weather all this day. In the Morning we got
on board a whole Ox, which we cut up and salted. I had eat ashore some of
as good and Fat Beef as ever I eat in my life, and was told that I might
have as good to salt; but in this I was very much disappointed. The one I
got was thin and Lean, yet well taisted; it weighed 408 pounds.

[April 1771.]

Monday, April 1st. In the P.M. I observed a dark, dence haze like a Fog
bank in the South-East Horizon, and which clouds began to gather over the
Table Mountain; certain signs of an approaching gale from the same
Quarter, which about 4 o'clock began to blow with great voialance, and
continued more or less so the Remainder of these 24 Hours, the Table
Mountain cap'd with White Clouds all the time. The weather dry and clear.

Tuesday, 2nd. First part fresh Gales at South-East, the remainder little
wind and calms. In the P.M. sail'd for England the Duke of Gloucester
Indiaman, who Saluted us at his departure. In the A.M. anchored here 2
Dutch Ships from Batavia, and a third at Anchor under Penguin Island in
distress. Put on shore some Sick People.

Wednesday, 3rd. Fine, pleasant weather. Some people on shore on Liberty
to refresh; the rest Employ'd repairing Sails and overhauling the
Rigging.

Thursday, 4th. Ditto Weather. Employ'd Painting the Ship and paying her
sides.

Friday, 5th. Var'ble light winds. Sail'd for Holland 3 Dutch Ships.
Employ'd as above, and getting on board Provisions, etc.

Saturday, 6th. Gentle breezes, with some rain in the Night.

Sunday, 7th. Gentle breezes, and fine, pleasant weather; a Signal for
some Ships being in the offing.

Monday, 8th. Gentle Breezes from the Westward. In the Night Anchor'd here
the Europa, an English East Indiaman from Bengal, and in the Morning she
saluted us with 11 Guns, which Complement we return'd.

Tuesday, 9th. Little wind at South-West, with Foggy, hazey weather.
Employ'd making ready for Sea.

Wednesday, 10th. Gentle breezes at South-South-East and fair weather.
Took on board 11 of our people from Sick Quarters.

Thursday, 11th. Ditto weather. Employ'd getting on board various Articles
of Provisions from the Shore.

Friday, 12th. Wind at South-West, fair weather. Set up the Topmast
rigging, and bent the Sails.

Saturday, 13th. Fresh breezes at South-West, and Cloudy, hazey weather,
in the night Anchor'd here a Dutch Ship from Holland; she sail'd about 3
months ago in company with 2 more. The news brought by this Ship is that
a War is dayley expected between England and Spain; Signals out for 4 or
5 Sail more being in the Offing, one of which is said to be a ship from
England; took leave of the Gouvernour, intending to Sail to-morrow.

Sunday, 14th. Wind Westerly, gentle breezes. In the P.M. got all the Sick
on board, many of whom are yet in a very bad state of health; 3 died
here, but this loss was made up by the opportunity we had of compleating
our full complement. In the morning unmoor'd and got ready for Sailing.

Monday, 15th. None of the Ships in the Offing are yet arrived. Desirous
as we must be of hearing news from England, I detemmin'd not to wait the
arrival of these Ships, but took the advantage of a breeze of wind from
the West-South-West; weigh'd and stood out of the Bay, saluted with 13
Guns, which Complement was return'd both by the Castle and Dutch
Commodore. The Europa Saluted us as we passed her, which we return'd.
This Ship was to have sail'd with or before us, but not liking the
opportunity she lay fast. At 5 in the Evening anchor'd under Penguin or
Robin Island in 10 fathoms water, the Island extending from
West-North-West to South-South-West, distant 1 1/2 or 2 miles.

In the Morning saw a Ship standing into Table Bay, under English Colours,
which we took to be an Indiaman; at Noon Latitude observed 33 degrees 49
minutes South; Cape Town South 20 degrees East, distant 7 miles. As we
could not Sail in the Morning for want of wind, I sent a Boat to the
Island for a few Trifling Articles we had forgot to take in at the Cape,
but the people on shore would not permit her to land, so that she
return'd as she went, and I gave myself no further Trouble at it. Mr.
Banks, who was in the Boat, was of opinion that it was owing to a mistake
made respecting the rank of the Officer commanding the Boat; be this as
it may, it seems probable that the Dutch do not admit of Strangers
landing upon this Island least they should carry off some of those people
which, for certain crimes, they Banish here for Life, as we were told was
done by a Danish Ship a few years ago. But they might have a better
reason for refusing our Boat to land, for it is not improbable but what
there might be some English Seamen upon this Island whom they had sent
from the Cape while we lay there, well knowing that if they came in my
way I should take them on board; and this, I am told, is frequently done
when any of His Majesty's Ships are in the Bay, for it is well known that
the Dutch East India Ships are mostly mann'd by Foreigners.

[Remarks on Cape of Good Hope.]

The Cape of Good Hope hath been so often discribed by Authors, and is so
well known to Europeans, that any discription I can give of it may appear
unnecessary. However, I cannot help observing that most Authors,
particularly the Author of Mr. Byron's voyage, have heightened the
picture to a very great degree above what it will bear; so that a
Stranger is at once struck with surprise and disappointment, for no
Country we have seen this voyage affords so barren a prospect as this,
and not only so in appearance, but in reality.

The land over the Cape which constitutes the Peninsula form'd by Table
Bay on the North, and False Bay on the South, consists of high barren
Mountains; behind these to the East, or what may be called the Isthmus,
is a vast extensive plane, not one thousand part of which either is or
can be cultivated. The Soil consists mostly of a light kind of Sea sand,
producing hardly anything but heath; every inch of Ground that will bear
Cultivation is taken up in Small Plantations, consisting of Vineyards,
Orchards, Kitchen Gardens, etc. Hardly any 2 lay together, but are
dispers'd from one another at some Distance. If we may judge from
circumstances, the Interior Parts of this Country is not more fertile;
that is, the fertile land bears a very small proportion to the whole. We
were told that they have settlements 28 days' journey inland, which is
computed at 900 English Miles, and thus far they bring Provisions to the
Cape by land. It is also said that the Dutch Farmers are so dispers'd
about the country that some have no neighbours within 4 or 5 days'
Journeys of them. Admitting these to be facts, and it will at once appear
that the Country in General cannot be very fertile, for it would be
absurd to suppose that they would raise provisions at such an immence
distance, where the trouble and expence of bringing them to Market must
increase, in proportion, could it be done nearer. The Dutch assign
another reason for being obliged to extend their Scattered Settlements so
far in land; which is, they never disturb the Original native, but always
leave them in peaceable possession of whatever lands they may have
appropriated to their own use, which in some places is pretty Extensive,
and that probably none of the worst, by which good Policy the new
Settlers very seldom if ever meet with any Disturbance from the Natives;
on the contrary, many of them become their Servants, and mix among them,
and are useful members to Society.

Notwithstanding the many disadvantages this Country labours under, such
is the industry, economy, and good management of the Dutch that not only
the necessary, but all the Luxuries, of Life are raised here in as great
abundance, and are sold as cheap, if not cheaper, then in any part of
Europe, some few Articles excepted. Naval Stores, however, do not want
for price any more here than they do at Batavia; these are only sold by
the company, who have a certain fix'd exorbitant Price, from which they
never deviate.

The inhabitants of the Cape Town are in General well bred and Extreamly
Civil and Polite to all Strangers; indeed, it is their Interest so to do,
for the whole Town may be considered as one great Inn fitted up for the
reception of all Comers and goers. Upon the whole, there is perhaps not a
place in the known World that can Equal this in Affording refreshments of
all kinds to Shipping. The Bay is Capacious, pretty safe, and Commodious;
it lies open to the North-West winds, which winds, we are told, very
seldom blow very Strong,* (* In the winter months these winds are very
strong, and make the anchorage in Table Bay anything but safe.) but
sometimes sends in a Great Sea, for which reason Ships moor North-East
and South-West, and in such a manner as to have an Open Hawse with
North-West winds. The South-East winds blow frequently with great
Violence; but as this is right out of the Bay it is attended with no
danger. Near the Town is a wharfe built of wood, run out a proper
Distance into the Sea for the Conveniency of landing and Shipping off
goods. To this wharfe water is convey'd in pipes and by means of Cocks.
Several Boats may fill water at one and the same time. The Company keeps
several large Boats or Hoys to carry goods, provisions, water, etc., to
and from Shipping, as well Strangers as their own. Fuel is one of the
Scarcest articles they have, and is brought a long way out of the
Country, and Consists of Roots of Trees, Shrubs, etc. Except a few
English Oaks which they have planted, this Country is wholly destitute of
wood, except at too great a distance to be brought to the Cape.* (* Since
Cook's day large plantations have been made in the vicinity of Capetown.)
In the Article Timber, Boards, etc., they are chiefly supply'd from
Batavia.

3 of the winter months, viz., from the middle of May to the middle of
August, the Dutch do not allow any of their Ships to lay in Table Bay,
but oblige them to go into False Bay, where there is a very safe
Harbour,* (* Simon's Bay, now the naval station, where there is a
dockyard.) and every other Conveniency both for their own Shipping and
Strangers, and where every produce of the Country can be had as cheap as
at the Cape Town. The Dutch, I am told, never Deviate from this custom of
sending their ships to False Bay at this Season of the Year,
notwithstanding there had not a Gale of wind hapned for many years that
would have put them in the least Danger in Table Bay.

Table Bay is defended by a Square Fort, situated on the East side of the
Town, close to the Sea beach, together with several other out works and
Batterys along the Shore of the Bay on each side of the Town. They are so
situated as to be cannonaded by Shipping, and are in a manner defenceless
against a superior land force. The Garrison at present consists of 800
regulars, besides Militia of the Country, which comprehend every man able
to bear Arms. They can, by means of Signals, alarm the whole Country in a
very short time, and then every man is immediately to repair to the Cape
Town. The French at Mauritius are supply'd with large Quantitys of
Provisions from the Cape, viz., Salted Beef, Biscuit, Flour, and wine.
While we lay in the Bay 2 Store Ships belonging to the King, of the
Burthen of 50 or 60 Gun Ships, and a Snow, sail'd for that Island Loaded
with Provisions, besides a large (King's) Frigate we left in the Bay
taking in her Cargo. The Provisions contracted for this Year by the
French were Salt Beef, 500,000 pounds; Flour, 400,000 pounds; Biscuit,
400,000 pounds; and Wine, 1,200 Leagers.


CHAPTER 11. CAPE OF GOOD HOPE TO ENGLAND.

[April 1771.]

TUESDAY, 16th. At 2 o'clock in the P.M. saw a large Ship behind the
Island, under French Colours, standing into Table Bay; at 3 weigh'd with
a Light breeze at South-East, and put to Sea; at 4 departed this Life Mr.
Robert Molineux Master, a young man of good parts, but had unfortunately
given himself up to Extravagancy and intemperance, which brought on
disorders that put a Period to his Life. At 6 we had the Table Mountain
and the Penguin Island in one bearing South-South-East, distant from the
latter about 4 or 5 Leagues; had it calm most part of the night. In the
morning a light breeze sprung up Southerly, with which we steer'd
North-West; at noon we were by Observation in Latitude 33 degrees 30
minutes South. The Table Mountain bore South 54 degrees East, distant 14
Leagues. N.B. The Table Mountain lies directly over the Cape Town, from
which last I take my departure; it lies in the Latitude of 33 degrees 56
minutes South, and Longitude 341 degrees 37 minutes West from Greenwich.

Wednesday, 17th. Fresh breezes and fair weather, with a swell from the
South-West. Wind Southerly; course North 50 degrees West; distance 118
miles; latitude 32 degrees 14 minutes South, longitude 344 degrees 8
minutes West.

Thursday, 18th. Gentle breezes and clear weather. Swell as before. Wind
Ditto; course North-West; distance 85 miles; latitude 31 degrees 14
minutes South, longitude 345 degrees 19 minutes West.

Friday, 19th. Little wind and Sometimes calm. Swell from the Southward.
Wind South-East to North-West; course North 50 degrees West; distance 16
miles; latitude 31 degrees 14 minutes South, longitude 345 degrees 33
minutes West.

Saturday, 20th. Gentle breezes and Clear weather. Wind Westerly; latitude
29 degrees 40 minutes South, longitude 346 degrees 10 minutes West.

Sunday, 21st. A moderate trade wind and Pleasant weather. Wind Southerly;
course North 54 degrees West; distance 100 miles; latitude 28 degrees 43
minutes South, longitude 347 degrees 42 minutes West.

Monday, 22nd. A Fresh Trade, and Pleasant weather. Exercised the People
at Small Arms. Observations for Longitude with the Sun and Moon agree
with the Log. Wind South-East; course North 50 degrees West; distance 118
miles; latitude 27 degrees 27 minutes South, longitude 349 degrees 24
minutes West.

Tuesday, 23rd. Gentle breezes, and Clear weather. Found the Variation in
the Evening, by the Amplitude, to be 17 degrees 40 minutes West, and by
Azimuth in the Morning 18 degrees 37 minutes. Employ'd repairing Boats
and Sails. Exercis'd Great Guns and Small Arms. Wind South-East by South
to West-South-West; course North 46 degrees West; distance 98 miles;
latitude 26 degrees 19 minutes South, longitude 350 degrees 42 minutes
West.

Wednesday, 24th. Ditto weather. Found the Variation to be 17 degrees 30
minutes West. Employ'd as yesterday. Wind West, West-North-West; course
North 20 degrees West; distance 78 miles; latitude 25 degrees 6 minutes
South, longitude 351 degrees 16 minutes West.

Thursday, 25th. First part, moderate and Clear; Middle, Squally, with
Rain; Latter, fresh Gales and Cloudy. Employ'd as above. Wind North-West,
South-West; course North 20' West; distance 105 miles; latitude 23
degrees 28 minutes South, longitude 351 degrees 52 minutes West.

Friday, 26th. Fresh Gales, and a large Swell from the Southward. Wind
South-South-West, South-East by South; course North 50 degrees West;
distance 168 miles; latitude 21 degrees 40 minutes South, longitude 354
degrees 12 minutes West.

Saturday, 27th. Fresh Gales and Cloudy. Employ'd repairing Sails. Wind
South-East 1/2 South; course North 55 degrees West; distance 168 miles;
latitude 20 degrees 4 minutes South, longitude 356 degrees 40 minutes
West.

Sunday, 28th. Ditto weather. Variation per Azimuth 14 degrees West. Wind
South-East; course North 56 degrees 30 minutes West; distance 152 miles;
latitude 18 degrees 41 minutes South, longitude 358 degrees 54 minutes
West.

Monday, 29th. Ditto Gales. Variation 13 degrees 53 minutes West. In the
A.M. crossed the line of our first Meridian, viz., that of Greenwich,
having now Circumnavigated the Globe in a West direction. Wind
South-East; course North 53 degrees West; distance 136 miles; latitude 17
degrees 19 minutes South, longitude 0 degrees 50 minutes West.

Tuesday, 30th. Fresh Gales and Pleasant weather. Exercised the people at
Great Guns and Small Arms. Wind South-East; course North 58 degrees West
South, distance 126 miles; latitude 16 degrees 11 minutes South,
longitude 2 degrees 42 minutes West.

[May 1771. At St. Helena.]

Wednesday, May 1st. Fresh Trade and Pleasant weather. At 6 A.M. saw the
Island of St. Helena bearing West, distant 8 or 9 Leagues. At Noon
Anchor'd in the Road, before James's Fort, in 24 fathoms water. Found
riding here His Majesty's Ship Portland and Swallow* (* This was not the
same Swallow that preceded Cook in circumnavigation. She had been broken
up.) Sloop, and 12 Sail of Indiaman. At our first seeing the Fleet in
this Road we took it for granted that it was a War; but in this we were
soon agreeably deceived. The Europa Indiaman Anchor'd here a little
before us; she sail'd from the Cape 2 days after us, and brings an
account the French Ship we saw standing into Table Bay was a French Man
of War, of 64 Guns, bound to India, and that there were 2 more on their
Passage. Wind South-East. At noon at Anchor in St. Helena Road.

Thursday, 2nd. Clear, Pleasant weather. In the P.M. moor'd with the Kedge
Anchor, and in the A.M. received some few Officers' stores from the
Portland. Wind Ditto. At noon at Anchor in St. Helena Road.

Friday, 3rd. Clear, Pleasant weather. Employ'd repairing Sails,
overhauling the Rigging, etc. Wind South-East. At noon at Anchor in St.
Helena Road.

Saturday, 4th. Little wind and pleasant weather. At 6 A.M. the Portland
made the Signal to unmoor, and at Noon to Weigh, at which time the Ships
began to get under Sail. Wind Ditto. At noon at Anchor in St. Helena
Road.

Sunday, 5th. Gentle breezes and Clear weather. At 1 P.M. weigh'd, and
stood out of the Road in company with the Portland and 12 Sail of
Indiamen. At 6 o'clock James Fort, St. Helena, bore East 1/2 South,
distant 3 Leagues. In the A.M. found the Variation to be 13 degrees 10
minutes West. Wind East by South; course North 50 degrees 30 minutes
West; distance 71 miles; latitude 15 degrees 5 minutes South, longitude 6
degrees 46 minutes West.

Monday, 6th. Moderate breezes and Cloudy weather. Sailing in Company with
the Fleet. Wind East-South-East; course North 47 1/2 degrees West;
distance 122 miles; latitude 13 degrees 42 minutes South, longitude 8
degrees 27 minutes West.

Tuesday, 7th. Ditto Weather. In the A.M. found the Variation to be 12
degrees 5 minutes West. Exercised the people at Great Guns and Small
Arms. Wind South-East; course North 46 degrees West; distance 137 miles;
latitude 12 degrees 5 minutes South, longitude 10 degrees 9 minutes West.

Wednesday, 8th. A Steady breeze and Pleasant Weather. All the Fleet in
Company. Wind South-East; course North 46 degrees 45 minutes West;
distance 126 miles; latitude 10 degrees 39 minutes South, longitude 11
degrees 42 minutes West.

Thursday, 9th. Ditto Weather. In the Evening found the Variation to be 11
degrees 42 minutes West. Wind South-East by South; course North-West;
distance 118 miles; latitude 9 degrees 16 minutes, longitude 13 degrees
17 minutes West.

Friday, 10th. At 6 in the A.M. saw the Island of Ascention bearing
North-North-West, distant 7 Leagues. Made the Signal to speak with the
Portland, and soon after Captain Elliott himself came on board, to whom I
deliver'd a Letter for the Admiralty, and a Box containing the Ship's
Common Log Books, and some of the Officers' Journals, etc. I did this
because it seem'd probable that the Portland would get home before us, as
we sail much heavier than any of the Fleet.* (* The Portland and the
India fleet got home three days before the Endeavour.) At Noon the Island
of Ascention bore East by South, distant 4 or 5 Leagues. By our
Observations it lies in the Latitude of 7 degrees 54 minutes South, and
Longitude of 14 degrees 18 minutes West. A North-West by North course by
Compass, or North-West a little Westerly by the Globe from St. Helena,
will bring you directly to this Island. Wind Ditto; course North-West;
distance 120 miles; latitude 7 degrees 51 minutes South, longitude 14
degrees 32 minutes West.

Friday, 11th. A steady Trade wind and pleasant Weather. At 1/2 past 6
p.m. the Island of Ascention bore South-East 3/4 East, distant 11 or 12
Leagues. Sailing in Company with the Fleet. Wind Ditto; course North 42
degrees West, distance 117 miles; latitude 6 degrees 24 minutes South,
longitude 15 degrees 51 minutes West.

Saturday, 12th. First and Middle parts a Steady breeze, and fair the
Latter; light Squalls, with rain. Wind South-East by South to South-East
by East; course North 31 degrees 15 minutes West; distance 123 miles;
latitude 4 degrees 38 minutes South, longitude 16 degrees 54 minutes
West.

Sunday, 13th. Gentle breezes and Clear Weather; hott and Sultry. Sailing
in Company with the fleet. Variation 10 degrees West. Wind South-East by
South; course North 32 1/2 degrees West; distance 119 miles; latitude 2
degrees 58 minutes South, longitude 17 degrees 58 minutes West.

Monday, 14th. Ditto Weather. Wind South-East by South; course North 32
1/2 degrees West; distance 109 miles; latitude 1 degree 26 minutes South,
longitude 18 degrees 57 minutes West.

Tuesday, 15th. Little wind and hot, Sultry weather. In the P.M. observed,
meerly for the sake of Observing, an Eclipse of the Sun. In the A.M.
brought another Foretopsail to the Yard, the old one being quite wore
out. Wind East-South-East; course North 32 1/2 degrees West; distance 85
miles; latitude 0 degrees 14 minutes South, longitude 19 degrees 43
minutes West.

Wednesday, 16th. Light breezes and fair weather. Variation 9 degrees 30
minutes West. Wind South-East by South; course North 31 degrees West;
distance 71 miles; latitude 0 degrees 47 minutes North, longitude 20
degrees 20 minutes West.

Thursday, 17th. Ditto Weather. Sailing in Company with the Fleet. Wind
Ditto; course North 31 degrees West; distance 61 miles; latitude 1 degree
39 minutes North, longitude 20 degrees 50 minutes West.

Saturday, 18th. First part ditto weather; remainder Squally, with Thunder
and Rain. The observ'd Latitude is 14 Miles to the Northward of the Log.
Sailing in Company with the Fleet. Wind South-South-East to East; course
North 20 degrees West; distance 86 miles; latitude 3 degrees 0 minutes
North, longitude 21 degrees 22 minutes West.

Sunday, 19th. Cloudy, unsettled weather, with some rain. In the A.M.
found the Variation by the Amplitude and Azimuth 7 degrees 40 minutes
West. Hoisted a Boat out, and sent on board the Houghton for the Surgeon,
Mr. Carret, in order to look at Mr. Hicks, who is so far gone in a
Consumption that his Life is dispair'd of. Observation at Noon 16 Miles
to the Northward of the Log. Wind South-East to South by East; course
North 20 degrees West; distance 98 miles; latitude 4 degrees 32 minutes
North, longitude 21 degrees 58 minutes West.

[With India Fleet. Homeward Bound.]

Monday, 20th. Dark, cloudy, unsettled weather, with rain. At Noon the
Observ'd Latitude was 27 Miles to the Northward of the Log. Sailing in
Company with the Fleet. Wind Variable between the South and East; course
North 19 degrees West; distance 70 miles; latitude 5 degrees 38 minutes
North, longitude 22 degrees 21 minutes West.

Tuesday, 21st. Little wind, with some heavy showers of rain. At 2 p.m.
had some Observations of the Sun and Moon, which gave the Longitude 24
degrees 50 minutes West, 2 degrees 28 minutes West of Account. In the
morning it was Calm, and the Ships, being near one another, several of
them had their Boats out to tow. We Observed the Portland to carry out a
long Warp. I, being desirous to see the Machine they made use of, we
hoisted out a Boat, and Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, and myself went on board
her, where we was show'd it. it was made of Canvas, in every respect like
an Umbrello; its Circumference, if extended to a Circle, was 24 feet,
tho' this was a Small one of the Sort; yet Captain Elliot told me that it
would hold as much as 150 Men could haul. I was so well satisfied of the
Utility of this Machine that I would not have delayed a moment in having
one Made had not our Forge been render'd Useless by the loss of some of
its parts. Winds Variable; course North 31 degrees West; distance 35
miles; latitude 6 degrees 8 minutes North, longitude 25 degrees 8 minutes
West.

Wednesday, 22nd. Variable, unsettled weather, with rain. About 9 o'clock
in the A.M. the Portland shorten'd Sail for the Sternmost Ships to come
up. As we imagin'd, this gave us an Opportunity to get a Head of the
Fleet, after which we made such sail as was necessary to keep in Company.
Wind Variable; course North-North-West 3/4 West; distance 58 miles;
latitude 6 degrees 58 minutes North, longitude 25 degrees 38 minutes
West.

Thursday, 23rd. Little wind from the Eastward, with frequent showers of
Rain, and hazey weather. The Fleet astern of us all this day. At Noon we
Shortned Sail for them to come up, the headmost being about 2 Leagues
off. Wind East to North-East; course North 25 degrees West; distance 56
miles; latitude 7 degrees 49 minutes North, longitude 26 degrees 2
minutes West.

Friday, 24th. First part Moderate breezes, and hazey, with rain; the
latter, fresh breezes and fair. At 3 p.m., finding the Fleet to come fast
up with us, we made all the Sail we could. Soon after it became hazey,
and we lost sight of them until near 6, when it clear'd up a little, and
we saw 3 Sail abreast of us, bearing East about 2 or 3 Miles' Distance;
by this we saw that they not only kept a better wind, but out sail'd us
upon a wind. It became again hazey, and we lost Sight of them, and
notwithstanding we keept close upon a wind all night, with as much Sail
out as we could bear, there was not one Sail in sight in the Morning.
Wind North-East and North-North-East; course North 54 degrees West;
distance 92 miles; latitude 8 degrees 42 minutes North, 27 degrees 18
minutes West.

Saturday, 25th. Moderate Trade Wind and Cloudy weather. Wind
North-North-East; course North 50 degrees 15 minutes West; distance 92
miles; latitude 9 degrees 41 minutes North, longitude 28 degrees 30
minutes West.

Sunday, 26th. A Steady Trade and Cloudy Weather. About 1 o'Clock P.M.
departed this Life Lieutenant Hicks, and in the Evening his body was
committed to the Sea with the usual ceremonys. He died of a Consumption
which he was not free from when we sail'd from England, so that it may be
truly said that he hath been dying ever since, tho' he held out tolerable
well until we got to Batavia. Wind North-East by North; course North 46
degrees West; distance 92 miles; latitude 20 degrees 47 minutes North,
longitude 29 degrees 35 minutes West.

Monday, 27th. A Steady, fresh Trade and Cloudy weather. This day I gave
Mr. Charles Clerk an order to act as Lieutenant in the room of Mr. Hicks,
deceased, he being a Young Man extremely well qualified for that Station.
Wind North-East; course North 39 degrees West; distance 103 miles;
latitude 12 degrees 7 minutes North, longitude 30 degrees 40 minutes
West.

Tuesday, 28th. A steady Trade and fair weather. Wind North Easterly;
course North 40 degrees West; distance 108 miles; latitude 13 degrees 30
minutes North, longitude 31 degrees 51 minutes West.

Wednesday, 29th. Fresh Gales and Hazey. Wind Ditto; course North 31 1/2
degrees West; distance 128 miles; latitude 15 degrees 19 minutes North,
longitude 33 degrees 2 minutes West.

Thursday, 30th. Ditto Gales and Cloudy. Fix'd a new maintopmast Backstay,
the old one having broke several times. Wind Ditto; course North 31
degrees 15 minutes West; distance 124 miles; latitude 17 degrees 5
minutes North, longitude 34 degrees 9 minutes West.

Friday, 31st. Strong Gales and Cloudy in the Evening. Got down Top
Gallant Yards, and in the Morning found the Variation 5 degrees 9 minutes
West. Wind North-East and North-East by East; course North 39 1/2 degrees
West; distance 136 miles; latitude 18 degrees 50 minutes North, longitude
35 degrees 40 minutes West.

[June 1771.]

Saturday, June 1st. Fresh Trade, and Cloudy weather. In the A.M. got up
Top Gallant Yards. Wind North-East; course North 35 degrees West;
distance 100 miles; latitude 20 degrees 12 minutes North, longitude 36
degrees 41 minutes West.

Sunday, 2nd. Moderate Gales and Clear weather. Variation 5 degrees 4
minutes West. Wind North-East to North-North-East; course North 49
degrees West; distance 104 miles; latitude 21 degrees 20 minutes North,
longitude 38 degrees 5 minutes West.

Monday, 3rd. A Gentle Trade Wind, and Pleasant weather. Wind North-East;
course North 44 degrees West; distance 85 miles; latitude 22 degrees 21
minutes North, longitude 39 degrees 9 minutes West.

Tuesday, 4th. Ditto weather. In the A.M. found the Variation to be 4
degrees 30 minutes West. Wind North-East; course North 34 degrees West;
distance 91 miles; latitude 23 degrees 40 North, longitude 40 degrees 4
minutes West.

Wednesday, 5th. Gentle breezes, with some Showers of Small Rain. Wind
Ditto; course North 52 degrees West; distance 83 miles; latitude 24
degrees 31 minutes North, longitude 41 degrees 11 minutes West.

Thursday, 6th. Ditto weather. In the A.M. found the Variation by the mean
of the Amplitude and Azimuth to be 5 degrees 34 minutes West, and by
Observation of the Sun and Moon found the Ship in Longitude 43 degrees 18
minutes West of Greenwich, 2 degrees 51 minutes West of the Log since the
last Observations; this I judge to be owing to a Westerly Current. Wind
East-North-East to East; course North 3/4 West; distance 90 miles;
latitude 26 degrees 1 minute North, longitude, per Observation Sun and
Moon, 43 degrees 18 minutes West.

Friday, 7th. Moderate breezes, and Cloudy. A.M., Variation per mean of 20
Azimuths 5 degrees 20 minutes West. Wind East-North-East; course North 15
degrees West; distance 84 miles; latitude 27 degrees 22 minutes North,
longitude 43 degrees 42 minutes West.

Saturday, 8th. Moderate breezes and Pleasant weather. In the A.M. found
the Variation to be 5 degrees 24 minutes West. By the Observation of the
Sun and Moon the Longitude of the Ship at Noon was 43 degrees 42 minutes
West. Wind Easterly; course North; distance 88 miles; latitude 28 degrees
50 minutes North, longitude 43 degrees 42 minutes West.

Sunday, 9th. Clear, pleasant weather and a Smooth Sea. In the A.M. found
the Variation to be 7 degrees 33 minutes West. Some Tropick birds flying
about the Ship; we have seen of these birds every day since we passed the
Tropick. Wind Ditto; course North by West 1/2 West; distance 81 miles;
latitude 30 degrees 11 minutes North, longitude 44 degrees 9 minutes
West.

Monday, 10th. Little wind and Clear weather. Exercised the people at
Small Arms. Wind Ditto; course North 30 degrees West; distance 71 miles;
latitude 31 degrees 12 minutes North, longitude 44 degrees 50 minutes
West.

Tuesday, 11th. Ditto weather. A Smooth Sea. Wind North-East by East;
course North 18 minutes West; distance 67 miles; latitude 32 degrees 16
North, longitude 45 degrees 14 minutes West.

Wednesday, 12th. Light breezes and clear weather. Variation by the
Amplitude in the Evening 7 degrees 0 minutes West, and by Azimuth in the
Morning 6 degrees 55 minutes West. Exercised Great Guns and Small Arms.
Wind East by South; course North-North-East; distance 48 miles; latitude
33 degrees 8 minutes North, longitude 44 degrees 53 minutes West.

Thursday, 13th. Little wind and pleasant weather. Found the Variation by
the Amplitude in the Evening to be 8 degrees 23 minutes; in the Morning 8
degrees 15 minutes, and by Azimuth soon after 8 degrees 14 minutes West.
Wind Ditto; Course North by East 1/2 East; distance 77 miles; latitude 34
degrees 14 minutes North, longitude 44 degrees 25 minutes West.

Friday, 14th. A Gentle Gale, and pleasant weather. In the A.M. saw 2
Turtle laying a Sleep upon the water. Wind East-South-East; course North
18 degrees East; distance 99 miles; latitude 35 degrees 48 minutes North,
longitude 43 degrees 48 minutes West.

Saturday, 15th. Ditto Weather at Daylight. In the Morning saw a Sloop to
Windward standing to the Eastward, which we run out of sight by Noon.
Wind South-East; course North-East 1/2 East; distance 119 miles; latitude
37 degrees 2 minutes North, longitude 41 degrees 54 minutes West.

Sunday, 16th. A Steady breeze and pleasant weather, with some rain in the
Night. At daylight in the Morning saw a Sail a head, which we came up and
spoke with a little after 10 o'clock. She proved a Portoguee Ship from
Rio de Janeiro, bound to Lisbon. Wind Ditto; course North-East 1/2 East;
distance 119 miles; latitude 38 degrees 18 minutes North, longitude 40
degrees 38 minutes West.

Monday, 17th. Steady, Gentle Gales and pleasant weather. Variation in the
Evening 9 degrees West. Wind South-South-East; course North 68 degrees
East; distance 104 miles; latitude 38 degrees 57 minutes North, longitude
38 degrees 36 minutes West.

Tuesday, 18th. Little wind, and clear weather. At 2 p.m. found the Ship
to be by Observation 1 degree 22 minutes to the Westward of Account
carried on from the last Observation; in the Evening the Variation was 14
degrees 15 minutes West, and in the Morning 14 degrees 24 minutes. Wind
South; course North 66 degrees East; distance 82 miles; latitude 39
degrees 52 minutes North, longitude 36 degrees 59 minutes West.

Wednesday, 19th. Fresh Gales and Cloudy. At 2 p.m. found by observation
the same Error in our Longitude as Yesterday, which I have now corrected.
The Longitude of this day is that resulting from Observation. At 10 A.M.
saw a Sail a head, which we soon came up with, and sent a Boat on board.
She was a Schooner from Rhoad Island out upon the Whale fishery. From her
we learnt that all was peace in Europe, and that the America Disputes
were made up; to confirm this the Master said that the Coat on his back
was made in old England. Soon after leaving this Vessel we spoke another
from Boston, and saw a third, all out on the same account. Wind South to
South-West; course North 73 degrees East; distance 127 miles; latitude 40
degrees 9 minutes North, longitude 36 degrees 44 minutes West.

Thursday, 20th. Fresh Gales and Cloudy, with some Showers of rain. At day
light in the Morning saw a Sail ahead standing to the East. A Swell from
the North-North-West. Wind South-West, North-West, North; course North 80
1/2 degrees East; distance 121 miles; latitude 40 degrees 29 minutes
North, longitude 33 degrees 10 minutes West.

Friday, 21st. Fresh Gales and Cloudy. In the P.M. saw a Sail astern
standing to the South-East, and at 11 o'Clock A.M. saw from the Mast head
13 Sail of Stout Ships, which we took to be the East India Fleet. Wind
Northerly; course East by North; distance 128 miles; latitude 40 degrees
33 minutes North, longitude 30 degrees 20 minutes West.

Saturday, 22nd. Fresh Gales, with Squalls, attended with rain. In the
Evening had 14 Sail in sight, 13 upon our lee Quarter, and a Snow upon
our lee Bow. In the Night split both Topgallant Sails so much that they
were obliged to be unbent to repair. In the Morning the Carpenter
reported the Maintopmast to be Sprung in the Cap, which we supposed
hapned in the P.M., when both the Weather Backstays broke. Our Rigging
and Sails are now so bad that something or another is giving way every
day. At Noon had 13 Sail in sight, which we are well assured are the
India Fleet, and are all now upon our Weather Quarter. Wind North to
North-East; course North 81 degrees East; distance 114 miles; latitude 41
degrees 11 minutes, longitude 27 degrees 52 minutes West.

Sunday, 23rd. Fresh Gales and Squally, attended with Showers of rain. In
the Evening all the Fleet were to Windward of us, and in the Morning not
one was to be seen. Wind North-East by North to East-North-East; course
South 69 1/2 degrees East; distance 80 miles; latitude 40 degrees 43
minutes North, longitude 26 degrees 13 minutes West.

Monday, 24th. First part, moderate breezes; remainder, Squally. At Noon
Tack'd. Wind North-East to East-South-East; course South 82 degrees East;
distance 64 miles; latitude 40 degrees 34 minutes North, longitude 24
degrees 49 minutes West.

Tuesday, 25th. First part and remainder a fresh breeze and Cloudy. Wind
North-East to North-North-East; course South 85 degrees East; distance 58
miles; latitude 40 degrees 39 minutes North, longitude 23 degrees 33
minutes West.

Wednesday, 26th. First part, breezes; remainder, little wind. Wind North
by East; course North 86 degrees 45 minutes East; distance 72 miles;
latitude 40 degrees 43 minutes North, longitude 21 degrees 58 minutes
West.

Thursday, 27th. Moderate breezes and Cloudy weather. Wind Westerly;
course North 54 minutes East; distance 54 miles; latitude 41 degrees 14
minutes North, longitude 20 degrees 59 minutes West.

Friday, 28th. Fresh breezes, with Showers of Rain. Wind West to
North-North-West; course North 38 degrees East; distance 123 miles;
latitude 42 degrees 55 minutes North, longitude 19 degrees 18 minutes
West.

Saturday, 29th. First part, little wind; remainder, Fresh Gales and
Squally, with Showers of Rain. Wind South-West to West and North-East;
course North 59 degrees 15 minutes East; distance 86 miles; latitude 43
degrees 39 minutes North, longitude 17 degrees 36 minutes West.

Sunday, 30th. Gentle breezes and fair weather. Variation in the Evening
18 degrees 30 minutes West, and in the Morning 19 degrees 30 minutes.
Wind Northerly; course North 50 degrees 45 minutes East; distance 87
miles; latitude 44 degrees 34 minutes North, longitude 16 degrees 2
minutes West.

[July 1771.]

Monday, July 1st. Ditto weather. In the Night passed 2 Sail Standing to
the South-West. Wind Ditto; course North 77 degrees 15 minutes East;
distance 90 miles; latitude 44 degrees 54 minutes North, longitude 13
degrees 59 minutes West.

Tuesday, 2nd. Little wind and Cloudy, hazey weather. One Sail in Sight to
the North-East. Wind Ditto; course East; distance 42 miles; latitude 45
degrees 54 minutes North, longitude 13 degrees 2 minutes West.

Wednesday, 3rd. Little wind and pleasant weather. At 9 A.M. found the
Ship by Observation of the Sun and Moon 1 degree 14 minutes East of
Account. Six Sail in Sight. Wind North and North-West; course North 56
degrees East; distance 54 miles; latitude 45 degrees 24 minutes North,
longitude 11 degrees 59 minutes West per Log, 10 degrees 45 minutes per
Observation.

Thursday, 4th. Gentle breezes and Cloudy weather. Variation per Azimuth
and Amplitude in the Evening 21 degrees 25 1/2 West, and in the Morning
20 degrees 10 minutes West. Wind West, North, and North-East; course
South 85 degrees East; distance 55 miles; latitude 45 degrees 29 minutes
North, longitude 10 degrees 44 minutes West per Log, 9 degrees 27 minutes
per Observation.

Friday, 5th. Little wind and Cloudy. At 1 P.M. spoke a Dutch Galliot
bound to Riga. At 5 Tack't, and stood to the Westward till 8 a.m., then
to the Eastward. Wind North-East; course North 50 degrees East; distance
8 miles; latitude 45 degrees 34 minutes North, longitude 10 degrees 32
minutes West per Log, 9 degrees 18 minutes per Observation.

Saturday, 6th. Gentle breezes and Cloudy. At 1 p.m. sent a Boat on board
a Brig belonging to Boston, last from Gibraltar, and bound to Falmouth.
Wind North-North-East; course North 72 degrees 30 minutes East; distance
37 miles; latitude 44 degrees 45 minutes North, longitude 9 degrees 42
minutes West per Log, 8 degrees 28 minutes per Observation.

Sunday, 7th. Gentle breezes and Clear weather. In the Evening found the
Variation by the Amplitude to be 22 degrees 30 minutes West. At 9 A.M.
Spoke a Brig from Liverpool bound to Porto, and some time after another
from London, bound to the Granades. She had been 3 days from Scilly, and
reckoned herself in the Longitude of about 10 minutes West, which was
about 40 minutes to the Westward of what we found ourselves to-day by
Observation. We learnt from this Vessel that no account had been received
in England from us, and that Wagers were held that we were lost. It seems
highly improbable that the Letters sent by the Dutch Ships from Batavia
should not come to hand, as it is now 5 months since these Ships sail'd
from the Cape of Good Hope. Wind North-North-East and North-West; course
North 50 degrees East; distance 49 miles; latitude 46 degrees 16 minutes
North, longitude 9 degrees 39 minutes West per Account, 9 degrees 29
minutes per Observation.

Monday, 8th. Little wind and hazey weather. Swell from the Northward.
Wind North-North-West to South-West; course North 46 degrees 45 minutes
East; distance 43 miles; latitude 46 degrees 45 minutes North, longitude
8 degrees 54 minutes West.

Tuesday, 9th. Fore and middle parts a Gentle breeze, and thick, Foggy
weather; remainder, a fresh Breeze and Cloudy. A swell from the
North-North-West all day. Wind South Westerly; course North 21 degrees
East; distance 100 miles; latitude 48 degrees 19 minutes North, longitude
8 degrees 1 minute West per Account, 8 degrees 7 minutes per Observation.

Wednesday, 10th. Pleasant breezes and Clear weather. At 6 o'Clock in the
Morning sounded, and Struck ground in 60 fathoms Shells and Stones, by
which I judged we were the length of Scilly Isles. At Noon we saw land
from the Mast Head, bearing North, which we judged to be about the Land's
End. Soundings 54 fathoms, Coarse, Grey Sand. Wind Westerly; course North
44 degrees East; distance 97 miles; latitude 49 degrees 29 minutes North,
longitude 6 degrees 18 minutes West.

Friday, 11th. Steady fresh breezes and clear weather. At 2 in the P.M.
saw the Lizardland, and at 6 o'clock the lighthouse bore North-West,
distant 5 Leagues, we being at this time, by my reckoning, in the
Longitude of 5 degrees 30 minutes West; soon after 2 Ships under their
Topsails between us and the land, which we took for Men of War. At 7
o'clock in the morning the Start Point bore North-West by North, distant
3 Leagues, and at Noon we reckon'd ourselves about 5 Leagues short of
Portland. This Forenoon a small cutter built vessel came under our Stern,
and inquir'd after the India Fleet, which, they said, they were cruizing
for and had not seen.

Friday, 12th. Winds at South-West, a fresh Gale, with which we run
briskly up Channel. At 1/2 past 3 p.m. passed the Bill of Portland, and
at 7 Peverell Point; at 6 a.m. passed Beachy head at the distance of 4 or
5 miles; at 10 Dungeness, at the distance of 2 miles, and at Noon we were
abreast of Dover.

Saturday, 13th. At 3 o'clock in the P.M. anchor'd in the Downs, and soon
after I landed in order to repair to London.

(Signed) JAMs COOK.


POSTCRIPT.

I HAVE made mention in Book 1st,* (* The Journal was written in thin
books, afterwards bound together in England. The page given here is of
this published copy.) page 76, of 2 Spanish Ships touching at Georges
Island some months before our Arrival there. Upon our arrival at Batavia
we were inform'd that 2 French Ships, commanded by the Sieur de
Bougainville, had put in there about 2 years before us in their way home
from the South Seas. We were told many Circumstances relating to the 2
Ships, all tending to prove beyond a doubt that they were the same 2 as
were at George's Island as above mentioned, which we then conjectur'd to
be Spaniards, being lead into that mistake by the Spanish Iron, etc., we
saw among the Natives, and by Toobouratomita pitching upon the Colours of
that Nation for those they wore, in which he might very easily be
mistaken; but as to the Iron, etc., there might be no mistake, for we
were told that either one or both of these Ships had put into the River
de la Plata, where they disposed of all their European goods brought for
that purpose, and purchased others to Trade with the Islanders in the
South Sea; and I think we were told that they also touched upon the
Spanish Main in the South Sea. As a proof of their having been trading
with the Spaniards, Bougainville's Ship had on board a great Quantity of
Spanish Dollars at the time she arrived at and left Batavia, some days
after our arrival at the Cape of Good Hope. I was told by some French
Officers, lately come from the Island Mauritius, that Orette, the Native
of George's Island which Bougainville brought away with him, was now at
the Maritius, and that they were going to fit out a Ship to carry him to
his Native country, where they intend to make a Settlement; 100 Troops
for that purpose were to go out in the same Ship. This account is
confirmed by a French Gentleman we have on board, who has very lately
been at the Maritius.* (* This intention was never carried out.) As I
have no reason to doubt the truth of this account, it leads me to
consider the rout that this Ship must take, which I think can be no other
than that of Tasmans as far as the Coast of New Zeland; and if she fall
in with that Coast to the Southward of Cape Farewell will very probably
put into Admiralty Bay, or Queen Charlotte's sound, as Tasman's track
will in some measure point out to her one or the other of these places. I
think it is not likely she will venture through the Strait, even suppose
she discovers it, but will follow Tasman's Track to the North Cape, where
no doubt she will leave him, and follow the direction of the Coast to the
South-East, as it will not be out of her way; by which means she will
fall in with the most fertile part of that Country, and as they cannot
know anything of the Endeavour's voyage, they will not hesitate a moment
to declare themselves the first discoverers. Indeed, I cannot see how
they can think otherwise, unless the Natives inform them to the contrary,
which they may not choose to understand. The French Officers before spoke
of would not allow that George's Island was first discover'd by the
Dolphin, though no doubt Bougainville did; but it was not for the
Interest of his Country, nor perhaps his own, to own it. Thus this
Island, though of little value, may prove a Bone of Contention between
the 2 Nations, especially if the French make a Settlement upon it, and
the Dolphin's voyage, and this of ours, published by Authority to fix the
prior right of discovery beyond disputes.

Now I am upon the Subject of discoveries, I hope it will not be taken
amiss if I give it as my opinion that the most feasable method of making
further discoveries in the South Sea is to enter it by the way of New
Zeland, first touching and refreshing at the Cape of Good Hope; from
thence proceed to the Southward of New Holland for Queen Charlotte's
Sound, where again refresh Wood and water, taking care to be ready to
leave that place by the latter end of September, or beginning of October
at farthest, when you would have the whole Summer before you, and after
getting through the Strait, might, with the prevailing Westerly Winds,
run to the Eastward in as high a Latitude as you please, and if you meet
with no lands would have time enough to get round Cape Horne before the
Summer was too far spent; but if after meeting with no Continent, and you
had other objects in view, then haul to the Northward, and after visiting
some of the Islands already discovered, after which proceed with the
trade wind back to the Westward in search of those before mentioned--thus
the discoveries in the South Sea would be compleat.* (* This programme
Cook carried out in his second voyage in the most complete manner
possible.)


INDEX.

Admiralty, Letters to, 357, 379.

Agulhas:
Cape, 375.
Current, 373.

Albatrosses, 46, 47, 128.

Anchors, Loss of, 276, 327.

Anchor-stocks eaten by worms, 86.

Arru Islands, 336.

Ascension Island, 387.

AUSTRALIA, EAST COAST OF:
Animals, 318.
Appearance of, 252, 265, 267, 272, 294, 317.
Bedford, Cape, 292.
Birds, 318.
Booby Island, 314.
Botany Bay, 242 to 248.
Bustard Bay, 258, 260.
Canoes, 243, 321.
Capricorn, Cape, 260.
Cleveland Bay, 270.
Cook's Passage, 301.
Cornwall, Cape, 313.
Damage to ship, 280, 281, 284.
Danger Point, 253.
Danger, Ships in, 253, 254, 262, 263, 267, 274, 278, 279, 303, 328.
Dangerous navigation through the reefs, 306 to 310.
  Description of, 317.
Dromedary, Mount and Point, 239.
Endeavour Reef, 274, 276.
Endeavour River, 279.
  Sail from, 292.
  Description of, 293.
Endeavour Strait, 313.
  Description of, 314.
Exploration, Remarks on, 305.
First attempts at landing, 242.
Fish, 318.
Flattery, Cape, 297.
Fruits, 318.
Glass houses, 254.
Gloucester, Cape, 269.
Grafton, Cape, 273.
Grenville, Cape, 307.
Hicks Point, 237.
Hillsborough, Cape, 267.
Historical notes, 325.
Hope Islands, 277.
Houses, 321.
Howe, Cape, 238.
Jackson Port, 249.
Jervis Bay, 241.
Kangaroo, 280, 281, 287, 291, 294.
Language, 322.
Lizard island, 298.
Lookout Point, 298.
Magnetic Island, 271.
Moreton Bay, 254.
Natives, 239, 242, 244, 245, 248, 272, 286, 287, 288, 289, 290, 311, 312,
319, 320, 323.
New South Wales, name bestowed, 312.
Palmerston, Cape, 267.
Pigeon House, 239.
Possession Island, 311.
Providential Channel, 304.
Rays (fish), 247, 291, 295.
Rockingham Bay, 272.
Sandy Cape, 256.
Ship aground, 274 to 276, 279.
Ship beached for repair, 280.
Sighted, 237.
Smoky Cape, 251.
Stephens Port, 250.
Thirsty Sound, 264.
Tides, Observations on, 267, 268, 312, 324.
Timber, 318.
Torres Straits, Doubts of existence of, 301, 302, 306, 314, 335.
Townshend, Cape, 263.
Tribulation, Cape, 274.
Upstart, Cape, 270.
Weapons, 320.
Weymouth, Cape, 306.
Whitsunday Passage, 269.
York, Cape, 310.

Banks, Mr., 2, 19, 38, 61, 63, 65, 72, 75, 76, 79, 81, 82, 87, 88, 111,
114, 115, 128, 130, 140, 165, 167, 184, 186, 200, 217, 225, 242, 245,
247, 259, 285, 288, 298, 311, 329, 332, 362, 377, 382.

Batavia, 353 to 364:
Description of, 363.
Sickly climate of, 359, 362, 364, 372.

Boats, Preservation of, 74.

Bolabola:
Description of, 117.
Passed, 113.

Boobies, 257, 314, 336, 378.

Boot-topping, 19.

Bougainville, 314:
His visit to Tahiti, 72, 76, 101, 314, 395.

Bow island, 56.

Buchan, Mr., Artist, Death of, 64.

Canoes:
Australian, 243, 321.
New Zealand, 221, 222.
Society Islands, 118.
Tahiti, 97.
Voyages in, 119, 121.

Cape Colony, Remarks on, 382.

Cape Pigeons. See Pintado Birds.

Capetown, 376, 383.

Celery, Wild, 141, 154, 166, 190.

Chain Island, 58.

Chart-making, Remarks on, 337.

Clerke, Master's Mate, 76, 390.

Cockles (Tridacna), 284, 295, 306.

Cook, Captain:
Character, xlv.
Death of, xliii.
Early life, xiii.
Survey of Newfoundland, xv.
First voyage, xxi.
Second, xxix.
Third, xxxvii.

Cook, Mrs., xv., xliv.

Damage to ship, 280, 281, 284, 353, 359.

Danger, Ship in, 169, 192, 204, 253, 254, 262, 263, 267, 274, 278, 279,
303, 308, 328, 330.

Dipping Needle, 13, 44.

Dolphin, H.M.S., Voyages of, xvii.

Downs, Return to, 394.

Dutch:
regulations for ships, 351.
Home Fleet, 357.
Dispute with, 362.

Dysentery:
Deaths from, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372.
Remarks on, 377.

Egg-birds, 53.

Fleet, Indian, 386.

Flogging, 20, 22, 64, 76, 77, 79, 107, 108, 155, 166, 167, 371.

Fothering the ship, 276, 277.

Fuegian natives, 37.

Funchal, 6.

Good Hope, Cape of, 375.

Gore, Lieutenant, 76, 120, 198, 245, 282, 285, 341.

Green, the Astronomer, 31, 35, 68, 76, 131, 150, 305, 316, 354, 368.

Hicks, Lieutenant, 20, 69, 76, 85, 145, 160, 240, 244, 304, 349, 350,
354, 356, 388, 389.

Horn, Cape, 41:
Longitude of, 45.
Passage round, 48.

Huaheine:
visited, 109.
Description of, 110.

Islands, List of, 229.

Journal, Copy of, sent home, 356, 357.

Kangaroos, 280, 281, 287, 291, 294, 318.

King George's Island. See Tahiti.

Krakatoa (Cracatoa), 349.

Lagoon Island, 55.

Language of New Zealand and Tahiti identical, 131, 225.

Le Maire Strait, 34 to 39:
Description of, 42.
Directions for, 42.

Lightning conductors, 354.

Line, Crossing the, 13.

Local attraction, 264.

Lunars, Cook's remarks on, 316.

Lunars, xxii.

Magra, Midshipman, 258, 278.

Molineux, Mr., Master, 67, 107, 285, 287, 290, 298, 300, 385.

Monkhouse, Midshipman, 277, 369.

Monkhouse, Surgeon, 59, 64, 109, 359.

Mories or Temples, 83, 104, 118.

Natal, Coast of, 373.

Natives:
See Tahiti.
See East Coast of Australia.
See New Zealand.

New Guinea:
Coast of, 330, 334.
Land in, 333.
Weapons, 333.

New South Wales:
See Australia, East Coast.
Remarks on, 317.

NEW ZEALAND:
Account of, 214.
Admiralty Bay, 213.
Animals, 217.
Attempt to seize a boy, 137.
Banks Peninsula, 197.
Brett, Cape, 163.
Burial, 224.
Camel, Mount, 171, 176, 177.
Campbell, Cape, 194.
Canoes, 221, 222.
Cannibalism, 156, 183, 184, 221.
Chart of, Accuracy of, 215.
Clothing, 219.
Colville, Cape, 158, 161.
Cook's Strait, 181, 186, 193.
Customs of mourning, 188.
Description of, 214.
Dusky Bay, 207.
Egmont, Mount, 180.
Farewell, Cape, 211.
First landing in, 130.
Food, 222.
Hauraki Gulf, 160.
Hawkes' Bay, 137.
Hemp or flax, 217.
Hippas, or Pahs, 147, 152, 153, 156, 164, 167, 169, 186, 192.
Houses, 223.
Iron sand, 156.
Islands, Bay of, 165, 169.
Jackson, Cape, 214.
Kaipara Harbour, 177.
Kairoura Mountain, 193, 196.
Left, 213.
Massacre or Murderers (Murtherers) Bay, 183, 214.
Mercury Bay, 148, 155.
Middle Island, Description of, 210.
Musical Instruments, 224.
Native, Name of, 189, 214.
Natives, Conflicts with, 131, 135, 136, 146, 147, 148, 151, 163, 164,
165, 166, 182, 187, 221.
  Description of, 218.
  Fearlessness of, 139, 221.
  Notes on, 230.
  Three captured, 132.
  Traditions of, 191.
  Traffic with, 134, 137, 141, 143, 145, 149, 151, 159, 160, 182, 192,
195.
North, Cape, 173.
Palliser (Pallisser), Cape, 193, 195.
Pattoo Pattoas, 154.
Places recommended for settling, 218.
Plenty, Bay of, 146.
Portland Island, 134.
Poverty Bay, 130.
Produce of, 216.
Queen Charlotte's Sound, 182, 191.
Religion, 224.
Ruapuke Island, 203.
Runaway, Cape, 145.
Saunders, Cape, 201.
Sighted, 129.
South Cape, 205.
Stephens Island, 188, 212.
Stewart Island, 205.
Tegadoo Bay, 141.
Thames, Frith of, 158, 161.
Three Kings, 174.
Timber, 159, 217.
Tolaga Bay, 142.
Tools, 223.
Traps, 204.
Turnagain, Cape, 130, 195.
Weapons, 154.

Ohetiroa, 120.

Ohwarrhe Harbour, 110.

Onrust, the Dutch dockyard, 354, 356.

Otaha, 112:
Excursion to, 116.
Description of, 117.

Otaheite. See Tahiti.

Oree, King of Huaheine, 109, 110.

Orton, Mr., 258.

Osnaburg Island, 58.

Oysters, 153, 156, 248, 260, 266, 318.

Pacific:
Exploration of, xv.
Explorers of, xvi.

Parkinson, Mr., 368.

Paumotu Archipelago, 55 to 58.

Pepys' Island, 33.

Perry, Mr., Surgeon's Mate, 359.

Pintado Birds, 122.

Port Egmont Hens, 129, 200.

Poverty Bay, Incidents at, 130.

Princes Island, Sunda Strait, 366.

Quiros, 213, 226, 301.

Raiatea. See Ulietea.

Rays (fish), 247, 291, 295.

Repairs effected, 360.

Rio Janeiro:
Arrival at, 18.
Viceroy of, 19 to 22.
Description of, 24.

Roggeween, 227.

Rotte, 340.

Rurutu. See Ohetiroa.

St. Helena, 386.

Savu, 341 to 347.

Scurvy, xvi., xvii:
Conquered, xxviii., xxx., xxxvi., xlvi.
Prevention against, xxiv., 59.

Seals, 128, 203, 217.

Society Islands, Description of, 116.

Solander, Dr., 65, 131, 166, 167, 184, 186, 242, 245, 288, 311, 332, 342.

Sour krout, 59.

Southern Continent, 51, 125, 226, 228.

Stranding of ship, 169, 274 to 276, 279.

Success Bay, 36, 42.

Suicide of a Marine, 54.

Sumatra Strait, 349, 366.

Swallow, H.M.S.:
Safety of, 350.
Voyage of, xix.

Table Bay, 376 to 381, 383, 384.

Tahaa. See Otaha.

TAHITI:
Arreoys Society, 95.
Arrival at, 59.
Breadfruit, 84.
Canoes, 97.
Chastity, Want of, 96.
Climate, 103.
Cloth manufacture, 99.
Clothing of natives, 93.
Cooking, Method of, 79.
Dead, Disposal of, 65, 81.
Description of, 88.
Desertion at, 80, 84,
Dogs as food, 79.
Emblems of peace, 64.
Expedition round, 81.
Fort erected at, 64, 68.
Funeral ceremonies, 102.
Government, 100.
History, Notes on, 105.
Houses, 96.
Images, 83.
Leave island, 87.
Manners and Customs, 94.
Mories (Morai) or temples, 83, 101.
Music, 94.
Natives of:
  Description of, 91.
  Rules for traffic with, 60.
Oamo or Amo, Chief, 80, 83, 105, 106.
Obariea, Queen, 67, 69, 70, 72, 79, 80, 83, 85, 86, 105.
Owhaa, Chief, 60, 63, 66.
Priests, 102.
Produce of, 89.
Religion, 101.
Sexes, separation at meals, 91.
Tattooing, 93.
Thefts at, 62, 63, 68, 73, 75, 78, 82.
Toobouratomita, Chief, 62, 65, 69, 71, 73, 77, 85.
Tools, 98.
Tootaha, Regent, 62, 67, 69, 70, 71, 74, 77, 85, 106.
Traffic for provisions, 60, 87.
Tupia, Priest. See Tupia.
Weapons, 99.
Wrestling, 71.

Teneriff, Peak of, 8.

Tenimber Islands, 336.

Tern. See Eggbirds.

Thrum Cap Island, 56.

Tierra del Fuego, Expedition into, 38.

Timor, 338.

Tootaha, Regent of Tahiti. See Tahiti.

Transit of:
Mercury, 150.
Venus, 76.

Tropic birds, 53.

Tupia:
Priest of Tahiti, 102, 105, 109, 112, 131, 132, 136, 182, 187, 242, 286,
349, 354.
Death of, 363.
Islands known to, 229.
Knowledge of, 121.
Taken on board, 87.
Usefulness of, 363.

Turtle, 285, 287, 288, 290, 295, 301, 352.

Two Groups Island, 57.

Ulietea:
Acting and dances at, 114.
Description of, 116.
Harbour, 111.
Opoony, King of, 115.
Rautoanui Harbour, 114.

Variation, Remarks on, 104.

Venereal Disease, 76.

Walsche, Cape, 331.

Warping, Machine for, 389.





Elliott Stock, 62, Paternoster Row.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Captain Cook's Journal During the
First Voyage Round the World, by James Cook

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CAPTAIN COOK'S JOURNAL ***

***** This file should be named 8106.txt or 8106.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/1/0/8106/

Produced by Sue Asscher and Col Choat

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
