would not desist at the firing of 2 Musquet Balls thro' one of their
Boats; at last I was obliged to pepper 2 or 3 fellows with small Shott,
after which they retir'd, and the wind coming at North-West we stood off
to Sea. At Noon, Cavally Islands bore South-West by South, distant 4
Miles; Cape Brett South-East, distant 7 Leagues, and the Westermost land
in sight, making like Islands, bore West by North; Latitude in per
Observation 34 degrees 55 minutes South.

Tuesday, 28th. A Fresh breeze from the Westward all this day, which being
right in our teeth, we kept beating to windward with all the sail we
could Crowd, but instead of Gaining we lost ground. A.M., being close in
with the land to the Westward of the Bay, which lies on this side of Cape
Brett, we saw at some distance inland 2 pretty large Villages Pallisaded
in the same manner as others we have seen. At noon, Cape Brett South-East
by East 1/2 East, distant 6 Leagues; Latitude observed 35 degrees 0
minutes South.

[At Bay of Islands, North Island, New Zealand.]

Wednesday, 29th. Fresh Gales at North-West and West-North-West, kept
plying to Windward until 7 A.M., and finding that we lost ground every
board we made, I thought I could not do better than to bear up for the
Bay, which lies to the Westward of Cape Brett, it being at this Time not
above 2 Leagues to Leeward of us, for by putting in there we should gain
some knowledge of it, on the Contrary, by Keeping the Sea with a Contrary
wind, we were sure of meeting with nothing new. These reasons induced me
to bear away for the Bay,* (* The Bay of Islands.) and at 11 o'Clock we
Anchor'd under the South-West side of one of the many Islands* (* Motu
Arohia.) that line the South-East side of it, in 4 1/2 fathoms; but as we
fell into this shoald water all at once, we Anchor'd sooner than was
intended, and sent the Master with 2 Boats to sound, who found that we
had got upon a Bank that spitted off from the North-West end of the
Island, and that on the outside of it was 8 and 10 fathoms Water.

Thursday, 30th. P.M., had the winds Westerly, with some very heavy
Showers of Rain. We had no sooner come to an Anchor than between 300 and
400 of the Natives Assembled in their Canoes about the Ship; some few
were admitted on board, and to one of the Chiefs I gave a piece of Broad
Cloth and distributed a few Nails, etc., among some others of them. Many
of these People had been off to the Ship when we were at Sea, and seem'd
to be very sencible of the use of Fire Arms, and in the Trade we had with
them they behaved Tolerable well, but continued so not long, before some
of them wanted to take away the Buoy,* (* The buoy on the anchor.) and
would not desist at the firing of several Musquets until one of them was
hurt by small Shott, after which they withdrew a small distance from the
Ship, and this was thought a good opportunity to try what Effect a Great
Gun would have, as they paid so little respect to a Musquet, and
accordingly one was fir'd over their Heads. This, I believe, would have
sent them quite off, if it had not been for Tupia, who soon prevail'd on
them to return to the Ship, when their behaviour was such as gave us no
room to suspect that they meant to give us any farther Trouble.

After the Ship was moved into Deeper Water I went with the Pinnace and
Yawl, mann'd and Arm'd, and landed upon the Island, accompanied by Mr.
Banks and Dr. Solander. We had scarce landed before all the Canoes left
the Ship and landed at different parts of the Island, and before we could
well look about us we were surrounded by 2 or 300 People, and,
notwithstanding that they were all Arm'd, they came upon us in such a
confused, straggling manner that we hardly suspected that they meant us
any harm; but in this we were very soon undeceived, for upon our
Endeavouring to draw a line on the sand between us and them they set up
the War dance, and immediately some of them attempted to seize the 2
Boats. Being disappointed in this, they next attempted to break in upon
us, upon which I fir'd a Musquet loaded with small Shott at one of the
Forwardest of them, and Mr. Banks and 2 of the Men fir'd immediately
after. This made them retire back a little, but in less than a minute one
of the Chiefs rallied them again. Dr. Solander, seeing this, gave him a
peppering with small Shott, which sent him off and made them retire a
Second time. They attempted to rally several times after, and only seem'd
to want some one of resolution to head them; but they were at last
intirely dispers'd by the Ship firing a few shott over their Heads and a
Musquet now and then from us. In this Skirmish only one or 2 of them was
Hurt with small Shott, for I avoided killing any one of them as much as
Possible, and for that reason withheld our people from firing. We had
observed that some had hid themselves in a Cave in one of the Rocks, and
sometime after the whole was over we went Towards them. The Chief who I
have mentioned to have been on board the Ship hapned to be one of these;
he, his wife, and another came out to meet us, but the rest made off.
Those 3 people came and sat down by us, and we gave them of such things
as we had about us. After this we went to another part of the Island,
where some of the inhabitants came to us, and were as meek as lambs.
Having taken a View of the Bay from the Island and Loaded both Boats with
Sellery, which we found here in great plenty, we return'd on board, and
at 4 A.M. hove up the Anchor in order to put to Sea, with a light breeze
at East, but it soon falling Calm, obliged us to come too again, and
about 8 or 9 o'Clock, seeing no probability of our getting to Sea, I sent
the Master to Sound the Harbour. But before this I order'd Matthew Cox,
Henry Stevens, and Emanl Parreyra to be punished with a dozen lashes each
for leaving their duty when ashore last night, and digging up Potatoes
out of one of the Plantations.* (* Cook's care to deal fairly with
natives is evinced by this punishment.) The first of the 3 I remitted
back to Confinement because he insisted that there was no harm in what he
had done. All this Forenoon had abundance of the Natives about the Ship
and some few on board. We Trafficked with them for a few Trifles, in
which they dealt very fair and friendly.

[December 1769.]

Friday, 1st December. Winds at North-North-West a Gentle breeze. At 3
p.m., the Boats having return'd from sounding, I went with them over to
the South side of the Harbour, and landed upon the Main, accompanied by
Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander. We met with nothing new or remarkable. The
place where we landed was in a small sandy Cove, where there are 2 small
Streams of Fresh Water and Plenty of Wood for fuel. Here were likewise
several little Plantations planted with Potatoes and Yams. The Soil and
Natural produce of the Country was much the same as what we have hitherto
met with. The people we saw behaved to us with great marks of friendship.
In the evening we had Some very heavy showers of rain, and this brought
us on board sooner than we intended. A.M., the wind being still contrary,
I sent some people ashore upon the Island to cut Grass for our Sheep, in
the doing of which the inhabitants gave them no sort of disturbance, and
in the same friendly manner did those behave that were alongside the
Ship. Punished Matthew Cox with 6 Lashes, and then dismiss'd him.

Saturday, 2nd. Winds at North-West and North. P.M. a Gentle breeze; the
remainder Strong Gales and hazey, with much rain towards Noon. At 8 a.m.
hoisted out the Long boat, and sent her ashore for water, and the Pinnace
to haul the Sean; but they had not got well ashore before it began to
blow and rain very hard. This occasioned them to return on board with one
Turn of water and but a very few fish.

Sunday, 3rd. P.M., Strong Gales at North, with rain; the remainder Gentle
breezes from the Westward. A.M., sent 2 Boats to sound the Harbour and
one to haul the Sean, the latter of which met with very little Success.

Monday, 4th. Gentle breezes at North-West, West-North-West, and West;
very fair weather. P.M., Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, and myself landed upon
one of the Islands* (* Probably Motu-Rua.) on the North side of the one
the Ship lays under. This Island is about 3 Miles in Circuit, and hath
upon it 40 or 50 Acres of Land cultivated and planted with roots; here
are likewise several small streams of Excellent water. This Island, as
well as most others in this Bay, seem to be well inhabited. At 4 a.m.
sent the Long boat to the above Island for water and some hands to cut
Grass, and at 9, I went with the Pinnace and Yawl over upon the Main,
accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander. In our way we passed by a
point of land on which stood a Hippa or Fortified Village, the
inhabitants of which waved us to come ashore, and accordingly we landed,
which we had no sooner done than the People came about us with Quantitys
of various sorts of fish, which we purchased of them for meer Trifles.
After this they shew'd us the Village, which was a neat Compact place,
and its situation well Choose. There were 2 or 3 more near unto this, but
these we did not go to. We afterwards went a little way into the Country,
and had some of the Natives along with us; we met with a good deal of
Cultivated land, planted mostly with sweet potatoes. The face of the
Country appear'd Green and pleasant, and the soil seem'd to be pretty
rich and proper for Cultivation. The land is every where about this Bay
of a moderate height, but full of small Hills and Vallies, and not much
incumbered with wood. We met with about 1/2 a dozen Cloth plants, being
the same as the inhabitants of the Islands lying within the Tropics make
their finest Cloth on. This plant must be very scarce among them, as the
Cloth made from it is only worn in small pieces by way of Ornaments at
their ears, and even this we have seen but very seldom. Their knowing the
use of this sort of Cloth doth in some measure account for the
extraordinary fondness they have shew'd for it above every other thing we
had to give them. Even a sheet of white paper is of more value than so
much English Cloth of any sort whatever; but, as we have been at few
places where I have not given away more or less of the latter, it's more
than probable that they will soon learn to set a value upon it, and
likewise upon Iron, a thing not one of them knows the use of or sets the
least value upon; but was European commodities in ever such Esteem among
them, they have no one thing of Equal value to give in return, at least
that we have seen.

Tuesday, 5th. P.M., had the winds at South-West and West-South-West, a
fresh breeze. At 3 o'Clock we return'd on board, and after dinner Visited
another part of the Bay, but met with nothing new. By the evening all our
Empty Casks were fill'd with water, and had at the same time got on board
a large quantity of Sellery, which is found here in great Plenty. This I
still caused to be boild every morning with Oatmeal and Portable Soup for
the Ship's Company's breakfast. At 4 a.m. weigh'd with a light breeze at
South-East, but had Variable light Airs and sometimes Calm until near
Noon, when a Gentle breeze sprung up at North. At this time we had not
got out of the Bay; our Latitude by Observation was 35 degrees 9 minutes
South. This Bay I have before observed, lies on the West side of Cape
Brett: I have named it the Bay of Islands,* (* The principal settlement
in the Bay of Islands is Russell. A little higher up the Waikare River,
at Opua, coal obtained from mines in the vicinity is shipped. At Russell,
then called Kororarika, the first settlement of missionaries was formed
in 1814 by Samuel Marsden. Here also the Government of the Island was
first established in 1840, but was soon removed to Auckland.) on account
of the Great Number which line its shores, and these help to form Several
safe and Commodious Harbours, wherein is room and Depth of Water
sufficient for any number of Shipping. The one we lay in is on the
South-West side of South-Westermost Island, that lies on the South-East
side of the Bay. I have made no accurate Survey of this Bay; the time it
would have requir'd to have done this discouraged me from attempting it;
besides, I thought it quite Sufficient to be able to Affirm with
Certainty that it affords a good Anchorage and every kind of refreshment
for Shipping, but as this was not the Season for roots, we got only fish.
Some few we Caught ourselves with hook and line and in the Sean, but by
far the greatest part we purchased of the Natives, and these of Various
sorts, such as Sharks, Stingrays, Breams, Mullet, Mackerel, and several
other sorts. Their way of Catching them is the same as ours, viz., with
Hook and line and Seans; of the last they have some prodidgious large
made all of a Strong Kind of Grass. The Mackerel are in every respect the
same as those we have in England, only some are larger than any I ever
saw in any other Part of the World; although this is the Season for this
fish, we have never been able to Catch one with hook and line. The
inhabitants of this Bay are far more numerous than at any other place we
have yet been in, and seem to live in friendship one with another,
although it doth not at all appear that they are united under one head.*
(* This district was found to be very populous when the missionaries
came.) They inhabited both the Islands and the Main, and have a Number of
Hippas, or Strong Holds, and these are all built in such places as nature
hath in a great part fortified, and what she hath left undone the people
themselves have finished. It is high water in this Bay at full and change
of the Moon about 8 o'clock, and the tide at these times rises and falls
upon a perpendicular 6 or 8 feet. It appears, from the few Observations I
have been able to make of the Tides on the Sea-Coast, that the flood
comes from the Southward, and I have lately had reasons to think that
there is a current which comes from the Westward and sets along shore to
the South-East or South-South-East, as the Land lays.

[Sail from Bay of Islands, New Zealand.]

Wednesday, 6th. P.M., had a Gentle breeze at North-North-West, with which
we kept turning out of the Bay, but gain'd little or nothing; in the
evening it fell little wind; at 10 o'Clock it was Calm. At this time the
tide or Current seting the Ship near one of the Islands, where we were
very near being ashore; but, by the help of our Boats and a light Air
from the Southward, we got clear. About an hour after, when we thought
ourselves out of all danger, the Ship struck upon a Sunken rock* (*
Called Whale Rock, in Endeavour's chart.) and went immediately clear
without receiving any perceptible damage. Just before the man in the
Chains had 17 fathoms Water, and immediately after she struck 5 fathoms,
but very soon Deepned to 20. This rock lies half-a-mile West-North-West
from the Northermost or outermost Island that lies on the South-East side
of the Bay. Had light Airs from the Land and sometimes Calm until 9
o'Clock a.m.; at this time we had got out of the Bay, and a breeze
springing up at North-North-West, we stood out to Sea. At noon Cape Brett
bore South-South-East 1/2 South, distant 10 miles. Latitude observed, 34
degrees 59 minutes South.

Thursday, 7th. P.M., a fresh breeze from the Westward and Clear weather.
At 3 o'Clock took several Observations of the Sun and Moon; the mean
result of them gives 185 degrees 36 minutes West Longitude from the
Meridian of Greenwich. What winds we have had this 24 hours hath been
against us, so that at Noon we had advanced but very little to the
Westward.

Friday, 8th. Forepart of P.M. had a Gentle breeze at North-North-West,
with which we stood in shore and fetched close under the Cavalle Islands.
They are a Group of Small Islands lying close under the Main land, and 7
Leagues North 60 West from Cape Brett, and 3 1/2 Leagues from Point
Rodney. From these Islands the Main land trends West by North. We were
here Visited by several Canoes, and the People in them seem'd desirous of
Trafficking with us, but at this time a breeze of wind sprung up at
South, they could not keep up with the Ship, and I would not wait for
them. The wind did not continue long at South before it veer'd to
South-West and West, a light breeze. Found the Variation in the Evening
to be 12 degrees 42 minutes East, and in the Morning 13 degrees East.
Keept standing to the West-North-West and North-West until 10 A.M., at
which time we tacked and stood in for the Shore, being about 5 Leagues
off, and in this situation had 118 fathoms Water. At Noon Cape Brett bore
South-East, distant 13 Leagues, and the Westermost land in sight bore
West by South, being at this time about 4 Leagues from Land. Latitude in
per Observation, 34 degrees 42 minutes South.

Saturday, 9th. P.M., had a Gentle Breeze at West, which in the Evening
came to South and continued so all night; this by daylight brought us
pretty well in with the land, 7 Leagues to the Westward of the Cavalle
Isles, and where lies a deep Bay running in South-West by West and
West-South-West, the bottom of which we could but just see, and there the
land appear'd to be low and level, the 2 points which form the Entrance
lie West-North-West and East-South-East 5 Miles from each other. This Bay
I have named Doubtless Bay;* (* There is a small settlement called
Mangonui in Doubtless Bay.) the wind not permitting us to look into this
Bay we steer'd for the Westermost land we had in sight, which bore from
us West-North-West, distant 3 Leagues, but before we got the length of it
it fell calm, and continued so until 10 o'Clock, when a breeze sprung up
at West-North-West, and with it we stood off North. While we lay
becalm'd, several of the Natives came off to the Ship in 5 Canoes, but
were fearful of venturing alongside. After these were gone, 6 more came
off; these last came boldly alongside, and sold us fish of different
sorts sufficient to give all hands a little.

At noon, the Cavalle Islands bore South-East by East, distant 8 Leagues,
and the Entrance of Doubtless Bay South by West distant 3 Leagues, and
the North-West Extremity of the Land in sight, which we judge to be the
Main, bore North-West by West. Our Latitude by observation was 34 degrees
44 minutes South.

[Off Rangaunu Bay, North Island, New Zealand.]

Sunday, 10th. Had the winds from the Western board all this day, a Gentle
breeze and clear weather. In the evening found the Variation to be 12
degrees 41 minutes East per Azimuth and 12 degrees 40 minutes by the
Amplitude; in the morning we stood Close in with the Land, 7 Leagues to
the westward of Doubtless Bay. Here the shore forms another large open
Bay; the Bottom of this and Doubtless Bay cannot be far from each other,
being to all appearance only seperated by a low neck of land from which
juts out a Peninsula or head land, which I have named Knockle Point. West
by South 6 Leagues from this point and about the Middle of the Bay is a
high Mountain or Hill standing upon a desart shore, on which account we
called it Mount Camel; Latitude 34 degrees 51 minutes; Longitude 186
degrees 50 minutes. In this Bay we had 24 and 25 fathoms Water, the
bottom good for Anchorage, but their seems to be nothing that can induce
Shipping to put into it for no Country upon Earth can look more barren
than the land about this bay doth. It is in general low, except the
Mountain just Mentioned, and the Soil to all appearance nothing but white
sand thrown up in low irregular hills, lying in Narrow ridges parrallel
with the shore; this occasioned me to name it Sandy Bay.* (* Rangaunu
Bay.) The first ridge behind the Sea beach is partly cover'd with Shrubs,
Plants, etc., but the second ridge hath hardly any green thing upon it,
which induced me to think that it lies open to the Western Sea.* (* This
is the fact.) As barren as this land appears it is not without
inhabitants. We saw a Village on this Side of Mount Camel and another on
the Eastern side of the Bay, besides 5 Canoes that were pulling off to
the Ship, but did not come up with us. At 9 a.m. we tacked and stood to
the Northward at Noon. Latitude in Per observation 34 degrees 38 minutes.
The Cavalle Isles bore South-East by East, distant 13 Leagues; the
Northern Extremity of the land in sight making like an Island bore
North-West 1/4 North, distant 9 Leagues, and Mount Camel bore South-West
by South, distant 6 Leagues. Tacked and stood in Shore.

Monday, 11th. Gentle breezes at North. M.d and pleasant weather. Keept
plying all the day, but got very little to Windward; at Noon was in the
Latitude of 34 degrees 32 minutes South, the Northermost inland set
yesterday at noon bore North-West by West, distant 6 or 7 Leagues.

Tuesday, 12th. Moderate breezes of Wind between the North-West and North
and Smooth Water, yet we gain'd very little in plying to Windward; at
Noon Mount Camel bore South by West 1/4, distant 4 or 5 Leagues. Latitude
observed 34 degrees 34 minutes South.

Wednesday, 13th. Fore part of P.M., Moderate breezes at North by West and
fair weather; stood in shore until 5 O'Clock, at which time we tack'd and
stood to the North-East being 2 Leagues to the Northward of Mount Camel
and 1 1/2 Mile from shore, and this situation had 22 fathoms water. At 10
it began to blow and rain, which brought us under double Reeft Top sails;
at 12 Tack'd and Stood to the Westward until 7 A.M. when we Tack'd and
stood again to North-East, being at this time about a Mile to windward of
the place where we tack'd last night. Soon after we Tack'd it came on to
blow very hard at North-North-West with heavy squalls attended with rain,
this brought us under our Courses and Split the Main Top sail in such a
manner that it was necessary to unbend it and bring another to the Yard.
At 10 it fell more moderate and we set the Top sails double reef'd. At
Noon had strong Gales and hazey weather, Tack'd and stood to the
Westward. No land in sight for the first time since we have been upon the
Coast.

Thursday, 14th. Strong Gales at West and West-South-West with Squalls at
times attended with Rain. At 1/2 past 3 P.M. Tack'd and stood to the
Northward. A small Island lying off Knockle point, bore South 1/2 West,
distant half a League. In the evening brought the Ship under her Courses,
having first Split the Fore and Mizen Top sails; at Midnight wore and
Stood to the Southward until 5 a.m., then Tack'd and stood to the
North-West. At this time saw the land bearing South, distant 8 or 9
Leagues; by this we found we had fell very much to Leeward since
Yesterday morning. Set the Top sails close Reeft and the people to dry
and repair the Damaged Sails. At Noon a strong Gale and clear weather,
Latitude observ'd 34 degrees 6 minutes South. Saw land bearing South-West
being the same North-Westermost land we have seen before, and which I
take to be the Northern Extremity of this Country, as we have now a large
swell rowling in from the Westward which could not well be, was we
covered by any land on that point of the Compass.* (* The Endeavour was
now to the northward of the north point of New Zealand.)

[Off North Cape, New Zealand.]

Friday, 15th. Fresh Gales at South-West, and for the most part clear
weather with a large Swell from the Westward. At 8 P.M. Tack'd and Stood
to the South-East until 8 a.m., and then Tack'd and stood to the Westward
with as much sail as the Ship could bear. At Noon we were in the Latitude
of 34 degrees 10 minutes South, and Longitude 183 degrees 45 minutes
West, and by Estimation about 15 Leagues from the Land notwithstanding we
used our utmost Endeavours to keep in with it.

Saturday, 16th. Fresh breezes between the South by West and South-West.
Clear weather with a Swell from the Westward. At 6 A.M. saw the land from
the Mast Head bearing South-South-West. Got Top Gallant Yards up and set
the Sail, unbent the Foresail to repair and brought another to the Yard.
At Noon, Latitude observ'd 33 degrees 43 minutes South; Course made since
Yesterday Noon North 60 degrees West; distance 56 Miles. The Land in
sight bearing South by West, distant 14 Leagues.

Sunday, 17th. A Gentle breeze between the South-West by West and West
with Clear weather. In standing in Shore sounded several times and had no
ground with 90 fathoms of line. At 8 a.m. Tack'd in 108 fathoms 3 or 4
miles from the Shore, being the same point of Land as we had to the
North-West of us before we were blown off. At Noon it bore South-West,
distant about 3 Miles. Mount Camel bore South by East, distant 11
Leagues, and the Westermost land in sight bore South 75 degrees West;
Latitude observ'd 34 degrees 20 minutes South. The people at work
repairing the Sails, the most of them having been Split in the late
blowing weather.

Monday, 18th. Moderate breezes at West and West-North-West and Clear
weather. At 4 p.m. Tack'd and stood in shore, in doing of which we meet
with a Strong rippling, and the Ship fell fast to leeward, occasioned, as
we thought, by a Current setting to the Eastward. At 8 Tack'd and stood
off North until 8 a.m., when we Tack'd and stood in, being about 10
Leagues from the Land. At Noon the Point of Land we were near to
yesterday at noon bore South-South-West, distant 5 Leagues. Latitude
observed 34 degrees 8 minutes South.

Tuesday, 19th. The wind still continues at West. P.M., a moderate breeze
and Clear weather. At 7 Tack'd in 35 fathoms; the point of land before
mentioned bore North-West by North, distant 4 or 5 Miles, having not
gained one inch to windward this last 24 hours, which is a great proof
that there must be a Current setting to the Eastward.* (* This strong
easterly current is now well known.) The Point of Land above mentioned I
have called North Cape, judging it to be the Northermost Extremity of
this Country. It lies in the Latitude of 34 degrees 22 minutes South and
Longitude 186 degrees 55 minutes West from Greenwich,* (* This position
is very correct.) and North 63 degrees West 31 Leagues from Cape Brett;
it forms the North Point of Sandy Bay, and is a peninsula juting out
North-East about 2 Miles, and Terminates in a Bluff head which is flatt
at Top. The Isthmus which joins this head to the Mainland is very low, on
which account the land off the Cape from several situations makes like an
Island. It appears still more remarkable when to the Southward of it by
the appearance of a high round Island at the South-East Point of the
Cape; but this is likewise a deception, being a round hill join'd to the
Cape by a low, narrow neck of Land; on the South-East side of the Cape
there appears to be anchorage, and where ships must be covered from
South-East and North-West winds. We saw a Hippa or Village upon the Cape
and some few inhabitants. In the night had some Squalls attended with
rain, which obliged us to take another Reef in our Topsails. At 8 a.m.
Tack'd and stood in Shore, and being moderate loosed a Reef out of each
Topsail and set the small sails. At noon we were in the Latitude of 34
degrees 2 minutes South, and being hazey over the land we did not see it.

Wednesday, 20th. P.M., Fresh breezes at West by North, and Clear weather.
At 6 Tack'd and stood off, North Cape bore South, distant 3 or 4 Miles.
At 4 a.m. Tack'd and stood in, Wind at West-North-West a fresh breeze,
but at 9 it increased to a Strong Gale with heavy squalls attended with
Thunder and Rain, which brought us under our Courses. At 11 it Cleared up
and the Wind came to West-South-West; we set the Topsails, double Reef'd
and Tack'd and stood to the North-West. At Noon, a Stiff Gale and Clear
weather; Latitude observed 34 degrees 14 minutes South. North Cape
South-South-West, distant 3 Leagues.

Thursday, 21st. Fresh breezes at South-West and clear weather with a
heavy swell first from the West, then from the South-West. At 8 a.m.
loosed the 2nd Reef out of the Topsails; at noon clear weather, no land
in sight. The North Cape bore South 25 degrees East, distant 24 Leagues.
Latitude observed 33 degrees 17 minutes South.

Friday, 22nd. A moderate Gale at South by West and South-South-West and
Cloudy weather. At 8 a.m. got up Top Gallant Yards and set the sails. At
Noon Latitude observ'd 33 degrees 2 minutes South. Course and distant
since Yesterday at Noon is North 69 1/2 West, 37 Miles. The North Cape
bore South 39 degrees East, distant 38 Leagues.

Saturday, 23rd. Gentle breezes between the South by West and South-West,
and Clear settled weather, with a swell from the South-West. Course and
distance sailed since Yesterday at Noon is South 60 degrees East, 30
Miles. Latitude observed 33 degrees 17 minutes South. North Cape South 36
minutes East, distant 27 Leagues.

Sunday, 24th. Light Airs next to a Calm all this 24 Hours. At 7 p.m. saw
the land from the Mast head bearing South 1/2 East; at 11 a.m. saw it
again bearing South-South-East, distant 8 Leagues. At Noon Latitude
observed 33 degrees 48 minutes South.

Monday, 25th. A Gentle breeze at South-East, the weather a little hazey.
P.M., stood to the South-West. At 4 the land above mentioned bore
South-East by South, distant 4 Leagues. It proves to be a small Island,
which we take to be the 3 Kings discover'd by Tasman; there are several
Smaller Islands or Rocks lying off the South-West end and one at the
North-East end. It lies in the Latitude of 34 degrees 10 minutes South,
and Longitude 187 degrees 45 minutes West and West 14 degrees North, 14
or 15 Leagues from the North Cape. At Midnight Tack'd and stood to the
North-East until 6 a.m., then Tack'd and stood to the Southward. At Noon
the Island of the 3 Kings bore East 8 degrees North, distant 5 or 6
Leagues. Latitude observed 34 degrees 12 minutes South, Longitude in 188
degrees 5 minutes West; variation per Azimuth taken this morning 11
degrees 25 minutes East.

Tuesday, 26th. Moderate breezes, Easterly and hazey weather; standing to
the Southward close upon a wind. At Noon was in the Latitude of 35
degrees 10 minutes South and Longitude 188 degrees 20 minutes West. The
island of the 3 Kings North 26 degrees West, distant 22 Leagues. In this
situation had no land in sight, and yet by observation we are in the
Latitude of the Bay of Islands, and by my reckoning but 30 Leagues to the
Westward of the North Cape, from whence it appears that the Northern part
of this land must be very narrow, otherwise we must have seen some part
of the West side of it.

Wednesday, 27th. Winds at East. P.M., a fresh Gale, with which we stood
to the Southward until 12 at Night, then Tack'd and Stood to the
Northward. At 4 a.m. the wind began to freshen, and increased in such a
manner that at 9 we were obliged to bring the Ship too under her
Mainsail, it blowing at this time excessive hard with heavy Squalls
attended with rain, and at the same time thick hazey weather. Course made
good since Yesterday at Noon South-South-West 1/2 West, distance 11
Miles. Latitude in 35 degrees 19 minutes South, Longitude in 188 degrees
29 minutes West. The Island of the 3 Kings, North 27 degrees East,
distant 77 Miles.

[Off North End of New Zealand.]

Thursday, 28th. The Gale continued without the least intermission until 2
a.m., when the wind fell a little and began to veer to the Southward and
to the South-West where it fixed at 4, and we made Sail and steer'd East
in for the Land under the Foresail and Mainsail, but was soon obliged to
take in the latter as it began to blow very hard and increased in such a
manner that by 8 o'Clock it was a meer Hurricane attended with rain and
the Sea run prodidgious high. At this time we wore the Ship, hauld up the
Topsail, and brought her too with her head to the North-West under a
Reefed Mainsail, but this was scarcely done before the Main Tack gave way
and we were glad to take in the Mainsail and lay too under the Mizen
staysail and Ballanced Mizen, after which we reefd the Foresail and
furl'd both it and the Mainsail. At Noon the Gale was a little abated,
but had still heavy squalls attended with rain. Our Course made good
to-day is North, a little Easterly, 29 miles; Latitude in per Account 34
degrees 50 minutes South; Longitude in 188 degrees 27 minutes West; the 3
Kings North 41 East; distant 52 Miles.

Friday, 29th. Winds at South-West and South-West by West. A very hard
Gale with Squalls but mostly fair weather. At 7 p.m. wore and lay on the
other Tack. At 6 a.m. loosed the Reef out of the Foresail and Set it and
the Reefd Mainsail. At 11 unbent both Foresail and Mainsail to repair,
and bent others and made Sail under them. At Noon Latitude observed 34
degrees 45 minutes South. Course and distance saild since yesterday East
by North 29 miles.

Saturday, 30th. Winds at South-West. P.M., hard Gales with some Squalls
attended with rain. A.M., more moderate and fair. At 8 p.m. wore and
stood to the North-West until 5 a.m., then wore and stood to the
South-East and being pretty moderate we set the Topsails close Reef'd,
but the South-West Sea runs so high that the Ship goes Bodily to leeward.
At 6 saw the land bearing North-East distant about 6 Leagues which we
judge to be the same as Tasman calls Cape Maria Van Dieman; at Noon it
bore North-North-East 1/2 East and we could see the land extend to the
East and Southward as far as South-East by East. Our Latitude by
observation 34 degrees 50 minutes South.

Sunday, 31st. Fresh gales at South-West and South-West by South
accompanied by a large Sea from the same Quarter. At 1 p.m. Tack'd and
Stood to the North-West until 8, then stood to the South-East. At this
time the Island of the 3 Kings bore North-West by West, distant 11
Leagues, and Cape Maria Van Diemen North by East. At Midnight wore and
Stood to the North-West until 4 a.m., then wore and Stood to the
South-East; at Noon our Latitude by observation was 34 degrees 42 minutes
South. The land of Cape Maria Van Diemen bore North-East by North distant
about 5 Leagues.

1770.

[January 1770.]

Monday, January 1st. P.M., fresh breezes at South-West by South and
Squally, the remainder moderate breezes at South-West by South and
South-West clear weather. At 7 p.m. Tack'd and stood to the Westward. At
this time Mount Camel bore North 83 degrees East and the Northermost land
or Cape Maria Van Diemen North by West, being distant from the Nearest
Shore 3 Leagues; in this situation had 40 fathoms Water.

NOTE. Mount Camel doth not appear to lay little more than a Mile from the
Sea on this Side* (* It is, in fact, about six miles, but the coast in
front is so low that the mistake in estimation is very natural.) and
about the same distance on the other, so that the land here cannot be
above 2 or 3 Miles broad from Sea to Sea, which is what I computed when
we were in Sandy Bay on the other side of the Coast. At 6 a.m. Tack'd and
Stood to the Eastward, the Island of the 3 Kings North-West by North. At
Noon Tack'd again and stood to the Westward, being in the Latitude of 34
degrees 37 minutes South; the Island of the 3 Kings bore North-West by
North, distant 10 or 11 Leagues; and Cape Maria Van Diemen North 31 East,
distant 4 1/2 Leagues; in this situation had 54 fathoms. I cannot help
thinking but what it will appear a little strange that at this season of
the Year we should be 3 Weeks in getting 10 Leagues to the Westward and 5
Weeks in getting 50 Leagues, for so long it is since we pass'd Cape
Brett; but it will hardly be credited that in the midst of Summer and in
the Latitude of 35 degrees South such a Gale of wind as we have had could
have hapned which for its Strength and Continuance was such as I hardly
was ever in before. Fortunately at this time we were a good distance from
land, otherwise it would have proved fatal to us.* (* The north point of
New Zealand is celebrated for bad weather.)

Tuesday, 2nd. Fresh breezes at South-South-West and West accompanied with
a rowling Sea from the South-West. At 5 p.m. the wind Veering to the
Westward we Tack'd and Stood to the Southward. At this time the North
Cape bore East 3/4 North and was just open of a point that lies 3 Leagues
West by South from it, being now well assured that it is the Northermost
Extremity of this Country and is the East point of a Peninsula which
Stretches out North-West and North-West by North 17 or 18 Leagues, and as
I have before observed is for the most part low and narrow except its
Extremity where the land is Tollerable high and Extends 4 or 5 Leagues
every way. Cape Maria Van Diemen is the West point of the Peninsula and
lies in the Latitude of 34 degrees 30 minutes South; Longitude 187
degrees 18 minutes West from Greenwich.* (* This is extraordinarily
accurate, seeing that the ship was never close to the Cape, and the
observations were all taken in bad weather. The latitude is exact, and
the longitude is only three miles in error. The persistence with which
Cook clung to this point until he could resume his exploration and
examination of the coast is very characteristic of the man. He would not
willingly miss a mile of it, nor did he.) From this Cape the Land Trends
away South-East by South and South-East to and beyond Mount Camel, and is
everywhere a barren shore affording no better prospect than what ariseth
from white sand Banks. At 1/2 past 7 p.m. the Island of the 3 Kings bore
North-West by North and Cape Maria Van Diemen North-East by East, distant
4 Leagues. At 5 a.m. Cape Maria Van Diemen bore North-North-East 1/2 East
and Mount Camel East. At Noon was in the Latitude of 35 degrees 17
minutes and Cape Maria Van Diemen by judgment bore North distant 16
Leagues; having no land in sight, not daring to go near it as the wind
blow'd fresh right on shore and a high rowling Sea from the Same Quarter,
and knowing that there was no Harbour that we could put into in case we
were Caught upon a lee shore.

Wednesday, 3rd. Winds at West-South-West and South-West; a fresh breeze
and Squally, the remainder moderate with frequent Squalls attended with
rain. In the evening shortned Sail and at Midnight Tack'd and made a Trip
to the North-West until 2 a.m., then wore and stood to the Southward. At
daylight made Sail and Edged away in order to make the Land; at 10 saw it
bearing North-East and appeared to be high land; at Noon it extended from
North to East-North-East distant, by Estimation, 8 or 10 Leagues, and
Cape Maria Van Diemen bore North 2 degrees 30 minutes West, distant 33
Leagues. Our Latitude by observation was 36 degrees 2 minutes South. A
high rowling swell from the South-West.

[Off Kaipara Harbour, North Island, New Zealand.]

Thursday, 4th. Winds at South-West and South-West by South; mostly a
fresh Gale accompanied with a rowling sea from the same Quarter. Being
desirous of taking as near a View of the coast as we could with safety we
keept Edging in for it until 7 o'Clock p.m., being at this time 6 Leagues
from the Land. We then hauld our wind to South-East and keept on that
Course close upon the wind all night, sounding several times but had no
ground with 100 and 110 fathoms. At 8 o'Clock a.m. was about 5 Leagues
from the Land and a place which lies in the Latitude of 36 degrees 25
minutes that had the Appearance of a Bay or inlet bore East.* (* This was
Kaipara Harbour, although, on a closer inspection, Cook thought he had
been deceived. It is the largest harbour on this part of the coast. The
town of Helensville stands on one of its arms.) In order to see more of
this place we kept on our Course until 11 o'Clock when we were not above
3 Leagues from it, and then found that it was neither a Bay nor inlet,
but low land bounded on each side by higher lands which caused the
deception. At this time we Tack'd and stood to the North-West. At Noon we
were between 3 and 4 Leagues from the Land and in the Latitude of 36
degrees 31 minutes and Longitude 185 degrees 50 minutes West. Cape Maria
Van Diemen bore North 25 West, distant 44 1/2 Leagues. From this I form
my judgment of the direction of this Coast, which is nearly
South-South-East 3/4 East and North-North-West 3/4 West, and must be
nearly a Strait Shore. In about the Latitude 35 degrees 45 minutes is
some high land adjoining to the Sea; to the Southward of that the land is
of a moderate heigth, and wears a most desolate and inhospitable aspect.
Nothing is to be seen but long sand Hills, with hardly any Green thing
upon them, and the great Sea which the prevailing Westerly winds impell
upon the Shore must render this a very Dangerous Coast. This I am so
fully sencible of, that was we once clear of it I am determined not to
come so near Again, if I can possible avoid it, unless we have a very
favourable wind indeed.* (* The mingled audacity and caution of Cook's
navigation off this coast must awake the admiration of every seaman.)

Friday, 5th. Fresh gales at South-West with frequent Squalls attended
with rain. The South-West swell still keeping up we stood to the
North-West all this day with a prest Sail in order to get an Offing. At
Noon True Course made good North 38 West, distance 102 Miles. Latitude in
per Observation 35 degrees 10 minutes South. Cape Maria Van Diemen bore
North 10 degrees East; distant 41 Miles.

Saturday, 6th. First part a fresh breeze at South-West by South; in the
night had it at South. A.M., light Airs from the Southward next to a
Calm, and Clear weather. Course made good to-day is North 76 West;
distance 8 Miles; Latitude per Observation 35 degrees 8 minutes South.

Sunday, 7th. Variable light Airs and Sometimes Calm with Clear pleasant
weather. At daylight saw the land which we took to be Cape Maria Van
Diemen bearing North-North-East, distant 8 or 9 Leagues. At Noon Latitude
in per Observation 35 degrees 0 minutes South. Cape Maria Van Diemen bore
North, distant 11 Leagues.

Monday, 8th. Gentle breezes at North-East and pleasant weather. At 6 p.m.
saw the land bearing East, and sometime after saw a Turtle upon the
Water. At Noon the land Extending from North to East, distant 5 or 6
Leagues, being the high land before mentioned and which it intersected in
2 places each having the appearance of a Bay or inlet, but I believe it
is only low land.* (* These were Hokianga and False Hokianga.) Course and
distance made good since Yesterday at Noon is South 33 East, 53 miles.
Latitude per Observation 35 degrees 45 minutes South. Cape Maria Van
Diemen North 25 West, distant 30 Leagues.

Tuesday, 9th. Gentle breezes between the North-East and North-West,
Cloudy weather sailing along shore within sight of Land at Noon. Course
and distance Sailed South 37 East, 69 Miles. Latitude in per Observation
36 degrees 39 minutes South; the place we were abreast of the 4th
Instant, which we at first took for a Bay or Inlet* (* Kaipara.) bore
North-East by North, distant 5 1/2 Leagues, and Cape Maria Van Diemen
bore North 29 West, distant 47 Leagues.

[Off Kawhia Harbour, North Island, New Zealand.]

Wednesday, 10th. Winds at North-North-East and North, the first part a
Gentle breeze, the remainder a fresh breeze and Cloudy with rain towards
Noon. Continued a South-East Course until' 8 o'Clock p.m. at which time
we had run 7 Leagues since Noon, and were between 3 and 4 Leagues from
the Land which appear'd to be low and Sandy such as I have before
Discribed, and we then steer'd South-East by East in a Parrallel
direction with the Coast, our Depth of Water from 48 to 34 fathoms; a
black sandy bottom; at daylight found ourselves between 2 and 3 Leagues
from the land which was of a Moderate height and Cloathed with Wood and
Verdure. At 7 o'Clock steer'd South by East and afterwards South by West,
the land laying in that direction; at 9 was abreast of a Point of Land
which rises sloping from the Sea to a Considerable height; it lies in the
Latitude of 37 degrees 43 minutes South; I named it Woodyhead. South-West
1/2 West 11 Miles from this Head is a very small Island which we named
Gannet Island, on account of the Great Number of these Birds we saw upon
it. At Noon a high Craggy point bore East-North-East, distance 1 1/2
Leagues; this point I have named Albetross Point; it lies in the Latitude
of 38 degrees 4 minutes South, and Longitude 184 degrees 42 minutes West,
and from Woodyhead South 17 minutes West 7 Leagues. On the North side of
it the shore forms a Bay wherein there appears to be anchorage and
Shelter for Shipping against Southerly Winds;* (* Kawhia Harbour. There
is a settlement here.) our Course and distance saild since Yesterday at
Noon is South 37 East, distance 69 Miles. Cape Maria Van Diemen bore
North 30 West, distant 82 Leagues.

Thursday, 11th. At 1/2 past Noon the wind Shifted at Once from
North-North-East to South-South-West with which we stood to the Westward
until 4 p.m., then Tack'd and stood on Shore until' 7, when we again
stood to the Westward having but little wind. At this Time Albetross
Point bore North-East, distant near 2 Leagues, and the Southermost land
in sight bore South-South-West 1/2 West being a very high Mountain and
made very much like the Peak of Teneriff; in this Situation had 30
fathoms Water; had little wind all night; at 4 a.m. Tacked and stood in
Shore, but it soon after fell Calm and being in 42 fathoms Water; the
People caught about 10 or 12 Bream. At 11 a light breeze sprung up from
the Westward and we made Sail to the Southward. At Noon was by
Observation in the Latitude of 38 degrees 4 minutes South; Albetross
Point bore due East, distant 5 or 6 Leagues.

Friday, 12th. Gentle breezes from between the North-West and
North-North-East; Fore and Middle part Clear Weather; the Latter part
dark and Cloudy; steering along shore South by West and South-South-West
at the distance of 4 Leagues off. At 7 p.m. saw the top of the Peaked
Mountain to the Southward above the Clouds bearing from us South; at the
same time the Southermost land we had in Sight bore South by West. Took
several Azimuths both in the Evening and the Morning which gave the
Variation 14 degrees 15 minutes Easterly. At Noon had the winds very
Variable with dark cloudy weather attended with excessive heavy Showers
of rain; at this time we were about 3 Leagues from the Shore which lies
under the Peaked Mountain before mentioned. This Peak we did not see, it
being hid in the Clouds, but judged it to bear about South-South-East,
and some very remarkable peaked Islands, lying under the Shore, bore
East-South-East, distant 3 or 4 Leagues.

Saturday, 13th. Winds Variable. P.M., Cloudy weather. At 7 o'Clock
sounded and had 42 fathoms water, being distant from the Shore between 2
and 3 Leagues and the Peaked Mountain as near as I could judge bore East.
After it was Dark saw a fire upon the Shore, a sure sign that the Country
is inhabited. In the night had some Thunder, Lightning, and Rain; at 5
a.m. saw for a few Minutes the Top of the Peaked Mountain above the
Clouds bearing North-East. It is of a prodidgious height and its Top is
cover'd with Everlasting Snow; it lies in the Latitude of 39 degrees 16
minutes South, and in the Longitude of 185 degrees 15 minutes West. I
have named it Mount Egmont in honour of the Earl of Egmont.* (* The Earl
of Egmont was First Lord of the Admiralty from 1763 to 1766. Mount Egmont
is a magnificent conical mountain, surrounded on three sides by the sea,
from which it rises to a height of 8300 feet.) This mountain seems to
have a pretty large base and to rise with a Gradual Ascent to the Peak,
and what makes it more Conspicuous is its being situated near the Sea and
in the Midst of a flat Country which afforded a very good Aspect, being
Cloathed with Woods and Verdure. The shore under the foot of this
Mountain forms a large Cape which I have named Cape Egmont; it lies
South-South-West 1/2 West, 27 Leagues from Albetross Point. On the
North-East side of the Cape lay 2 Small Islands near to a very remarkable
Point of the Main that riseth to a good height in the very form of a
Sugar Loaf. To the Southward of the Cape the Land tends away South-East
by East and East-South-East, and seems to be every where a bold shore. At
Noon had variable light Airs and Clear weather. Latitude observ'd 39
degrees 32 minutes South. Cape Egmont bore about North-East, and we were
about 4 Leagues from the Shore in that direction; in this situation had
40 fathoms Water.

[In North Part of Cook's Strait.]

Sunday, 14th. P.M., had a Gentle Breeze at West. In the evening came to
North-West by West and Continued so all night and blow'd a fresh breeze;
we steer'd along shore East-South-East and South-East by East, keeping
between 2 and 3 Leagues off. At 1/2 past 7 p.m. Saw for a few Minutes
Mount Egmont which bore from us North 17 West, distant 10 Leagues. At 5
a.m. Steer'd South-East by South the land inclining more Southerly, but
half an hour after we saw land bearing South-West by South which we hauld
up for.* (* The north end of the South Island, New Zealand.) At this time
the weather was squally attended with showers of rain. At noon had a
Steady fresh breeze at West by North and Cloudy weather; the South-West
Extremity of the Land in sight bore South 63 degrees West and some high
land, which makes like an Island lying under the Main, bore
South-South-East, distant 5 Leagues. The bottom of the Bay* (* This was
the Northern part of Cook's Strait, but it was thought at the time to be
a bay.) we are now in, and which bears from us South we cannot see,
altho' it is very Clear in that Quarter. Our Latitude by Observation is
40 degrees 27 minutes South, Longitude 184 degrees 39 minutes West.* (*
The western side of the North Island, which Cook took such trouble to
follow, is 400 miles long, and is a most dangerous coast to explore, on
account of the winds being mostly on shore. This prevented him from
getting very close; and he missed the entrances to several harbours, such
as the Manukau, the Waikato River, Whaingaroa, and others. No canoes were
seen, as the coast is not favourable for such craft.)

Monday, 15th. Fore and Middle parts, fresh breezes between the West and
North-West and fair weather. At 8 p.m. we were within 2 Leagues of the
Land, we discover'd in the morning, having run 10 Leagues since Noon; the
land seen then bearing South 63 degrees West bore now North 59 degrees
West, distant 7 or 8 Leagues and makes like an Island. Between this land
or Island and Cape Egmont is a very broad and Deep Bay or inlet the
South-West side of which we are now upon, and here the Land is of a
Considerable height, distinguished by Hills and Valleys, and the Shore
seems to form several Bays, into one of which I intend to go with the
Ship in order to Careen her (she being very foul) and to repair some few
defects, recruit our Stock of Wood, Water, etc. With this View we Keept
plying on and off all Night, having from 80 to 63 fathoms Water; at
daylight stood in for an inlet which runs in South-West.* (* Queen
Charlotte's Sound, in the north-east part of the Middle Island.) At 8
a.m. we were got within the Entrance which may be known by a Reef of
Rocks stretching off from the North-West point, and some rocky Islands
lying off the South-East point. At 9 o'clock being little wind and
Variable we were carried by the Tide or Current within 2 Cables length of
the North-West Shore where we had 54 fathoms, but with the help of our
Boats we got Clear, at this time we saw rise up twice near the Ship a Sea
Lyon, the Head of which was Exactly like the head of the Male one
described by Lord Anson. We likewise saw a Canoe with some of the Natives
cross the Bay, and a Village situated upon a point of an Island, which
lies 7 or 8 miles with the Entrance. At Noon we were the length of this
Island, and being little wind had the Boats ahead Towing.


CHAPTER 6. EXPLORATION OF MIDDLE ISLAND OF NEW ZEALAND.

[January 1770. In Queen Charlotte's Sound, New Zealand.]

TUESDAY, 16th. Variable light Airs and Clear settled weather. At 1 p.m.
hauled close round the South-West end of the Island, on which stands the
Village before mention'd, the inhabitants of which were all in Arms. At 2
o'Clock we anchor'd in a very Snug Cove,* (* Ship Cove, in Queen
Charlotte's Sound.) which is on the North-West side of the Bay facing the
South-West end of the Island in 11 fathoms; soft Ground, and moor'd with
the Stream Anchor. By this time several of the Natives had come off to
the Ship in their Canoes, and after heaving a few stones at us and having
some Conversation with Tupia, some of them Ventur'd on board, where they
made but a very short stay before they went into their Canoes again, and
soon after left us altogether. I then went ashore in the bottom of the
Cove, accompanied by most of the Gentlemen on board. We found a fine
Stream of Excellent Water, and as to wood the land is here one intire
forest. Having the Sean with us we made a few hauls and caught 300 pounds
weight of different sorts of fish, which were equally distributed to the
Ship's Company. A.M., Careen'd the Ship, scrubb'd and pay'd the Larboard
side. Several of the Natives Visited us this Morning, and brought with
them some stinking fish, which, however, I order'd to be bought up to
encourage them in this kind of Traffick, but Trade at this time seem'd
not to be their Object, but were more inclinable to Quarrel, and as the
Ship was upon the Carreen I thought they might give us some Trouble, and
perhaps hurt some of our people that were in the Boats alongside. For
this reason I fir'd some small shott at one of the first Offenders; this
made them keep at a proper distance while they stay'd, which was not long
before they all went away. These people declared to us this morning, that
they never either saw or heard of a Ship like ours being upon this Coast
before. From this it appears that they have no Tradition among them of
Tasman being here, for I believe Murtherers bay, the place where he
anchor'd, not to be far from this place;* (* Tasman's Massacre Bay lies
70 miles to the West-North-West.) but this cannot be it from the
Latitude, for I find by an Observation made this day at Noon that we are
at an Anchor in 41 degrees 5 minutes 32 seconds South, which is 15 miles
to the Southward of Murtherers Bay.* (* The bay in Queen Charlotte's
Sound in which the Endeavour anchored, Ship Cove, lies 7 miles within the
entrance on the western shore.)

Wednesday, 17th. Light Airs, Calm and pleasant weather. P.M., righted
ship and got the other Side ready for heeling out, and in the Evening
Haul'd the Sean and caught a few fish. While this was doing some of us
went in the pinnace into another Cove, not far from where the Ship lays;
in going thither we meet with a Woman floating upon the Water, who to all
appearance had not been dead many days. Soon after we landed we meet with
2 or 3 of the Natives who not long before must have been regaling
themselves upon human flesh, for I got from one of them the bone of the
Fore arm of a Man or Woman which was quite fresh, and the flesh had been
but lately picked off, which they told us they had eat; they gave us to
understand that but a few days before they had taken, Kill'd, and Eat a
Boats Crew of their Enemies or strangers, for I believe they look upon
all strangers as Enemies. From what we could learn the woman we had seen
floating upon the Water was in this Boat and had been drowned in the
fray. There was not one of us that had the least doubt but what these
people were cannibals; but the finding this bone with part of the sinews
fresh upon it was a stronger proof than any we had yet met with, and, in
order to be fully satisfied of the truth of what they had told us, we
told one of them that it was not the bone of a man, but that of a dog;
but he, with great fervency, took hold of his Fore Arm, and told us again
that it was that bone: and to convince us that they had eat the flesh he
took hold of the flesh of his own Arm with his teeth and made Signs of
Eating. A.M., Careen'd, Scrub'd, and pay'd the Starboard side of the
Ship; while this was doing some of the Natives came alongside seemingly
only to look at us. There was a woman among them who had her Arms,
thighs, and Legs cut in several place's; this was done by way of Mourning
for her Husband who had very lately been Kill'd and Eat by some of their
Enemies as they told us and pointed towards' the place where it was done,
which lay somewhere to the Eastward. Mr. Banks got from one of them a
Bone of the fore Arm, much in the same state as the one before mentioned;
and to show us that they eat the flesh, they bit and Naw'd the bone and
draw'd it through their Mouths, and this in such a manner as plainly
Shew'd that the flesh to them was a Dainty Bit.

Thursday, 18th. Winds mostly from the South-West; a gentle breeze and
Clear settled weather. P.M., righted the Ship and sent on shore all or
most of our empty Casks, and in the Morning the Coopers went about
Trimming them, and the Carpenters went to work to Caulk the sides and to
repair other defects in the Ship, while the seamen are Employ'd in the
hold Cutting Wood, etc., etc. I made a little Excursion in the pinnace in
order to take a View of the Bay, accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr.
Solander. We met with nothing remarkable, and as we were on the West side
of the Bay where the land is so closely cover'd with wood that we could
not penetrate into the country.

Friday, 19th. Winds and weather as yesterday, and the employment of the
people the same. In the P.M. some of our people found in the Skirts of
the Wood 3 hip Bones of Men; they lay near to a Hole or Oven, that is a
place where the Natives dress their Victuals; this Circumstance, trifling
as it is, is still a further proof that these people eat human flesh. In
the A.M. set up the Forge to repair the Braces of the Tiller and such
other Iron work as was wanting. The Natives came alongside and sold us a
quantity of large Mackrell for Nails, pieces of Cloth and paper, and in
this Traffick they never once attempted to defraud us of any one thing
but dealt as fair as people could do.

Saturday, 20th. Winds Southerly and fair, pleasant weather. Employ'd
wooding, Watering, etc., and in the A.M. sent part of the Powder ashore
to be Air'd. Some of the Natives brought alongside in one of their Canoes
4 of the heads of the Men they had lately kill'd; both the Hairy Scalps
and Skin of the faces were on. Mr. Banks bought one of the 4, but they
would not part with any of the other on any account whatever. The one Mr.
Banks got had received a blow on the Temple that had broke the Skull.
This morning I set out in the Pinnace accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr.
Solander, in order to Survey the West Coast of the Bay; we took our rout
towards the head of the Bay, but it was near noon before we had got
beyond the place we had been before.

Sunday, 21st. P.M., a Gentle breeze of Wind Southerly, the remainder
light Airs and Calm with clear, settled weather. P.M., the people
employ'd as usual, and at 8 o'Clock we return'd on board the Pinnace from
surveying the bay, in the doing of which I met with an Excellent Harbour,
but saw no inhabitants or any Cultivated land. In the A.M. after hauling
the Sean for fish, I gave every body leave to go ashore at the Watering
place to amuse themselves as they thought proper.

Monday, 22nd. P.M., and in the night had variable light Airs and Calms.
A.M., had a fresh breeze Southerly and Cloudy weather. In the morning the
people were set about the necessary business of the Ship, and I set out
in the Pinnace accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, with a view of
examining the head of the inlet, but after rowing between 4 and 5 Leagues
up it, and finding no probability of reaching it, or even seeing the
end,* (* The head of Queen Charlotte's Sound is 20 miles from where the
Endeavour was lying.) the wind being against us and the day already half
spent; we landed at Noon on the South-East side in order to try to get
upon one of the Hills, to view the inlet from thence.

Tuesday, 23rd. P.M., Winds Southerly, a fresh breeze. Agreeable to what
is mentioned above I took one hand with me and Climbed up to the Top of
one of the Hills, but when I came there I was hindered from seeing up the
inlet by higher hills, which I could not come at for impenetrable woods,
but I was abundantly recompensed for the trouble I had in assending the
Hill, for from it I saw what I took to be the Eastern Sea, and a Strait
or passage from it into the Western Sea; a little to the Eastward of the
Entrance of the inlet in which we now lay with the Ship. The Main land
which lies on the South-East side of this inlet appeared to me to be a
narrow ridge of very high hills, and to form a part of the South-West
side of the Strait;* (* Cook's Strait, which divides the two islands of
New Zealand.) the land on the opposite side seem'd to tend away East, as
far as the Eye could see. To the South-East appeared an Open Sea, and
this I took to be the Eastern. I likewise saw some Islands lying on the
East side of the inlet, which before I had taken to be a part of the main
land. As soon as I had desended the hill and we had refreshed ourselves,
we set out in order to return to the Ship, and in our way passed through
and Examin'd the Harbours, Coves, etc., that lay behind the Islands above
mentioned. In this rout we met with an old Village in which were a good
many Houses, but no Body had lived in them lately; we likewise saw
another that was inhabited, but the day being so far spent, that we had
not time to go to it, but made the best of our way to the Ship, which we
reached between 8 and 9 o'Clock. In the night had much rain with Cloudy,
Hazey weather, which continued by intervals until Noon.

Wednesday, 24th. P.M., had a fresh breeze southerly and cloudy weather.
After dinner I employ'd myself in carrying on the survey of the place,
and upon one of the Islands where I landed were a number of houses but no
inhabitants, neither had any been there lately. In the morning the Gunner
was sent ashore with the remainder of the powder to-day, and the Long
boat was sent with a Gang of hands to one of the Islands to cut Grass for
our Sheep, and the rest of the people were employ'd about the usual work
of the Ship. This forenoon some of us visited the Hippa which is situated
on the point of the Island mentioned on our first arrival;* (* Motuara.)
the inhabitants of this place shew'd not the least dislike at our coming,
but, on the contrary, with a great deal of seeming good nature shew'd us
all over the place. We found among them some human bones, the flesh of
which they told us they had eat; they likewise informed us that there was
no passage into the Sea thro' this inlet, as I had imagined their was,
because above where I was in the Boat it turn'd away to the Westward.
Leaving these people, we Travelled to the other end of the Island, and
there took Water and Crossed over upon the Main, where we met with
several Houses that were at present, or had very lately been, inhabited,
but we saw but very few of the inhabitants, and these were in their Boats
fishing; after Viewing this place we returned on board to Dinner.

Thursday, 25th. Winds at North West, a Gentle breeze and fair weather.
P.M. the Long boat having return'd with a Load of Grass, she was employ'd
bringing on board Wood and Water, and the Caulkers having finished
Caulking the Ship's sides (a thing they have been employ'd upon ever
since we came here), they were pay'd with Tar. Early in the A.M. the Long
boat was sent again for Grass, and return'd at Noon with a Load.

Friday, 26th. Gentle breezes and pleasant weather. In the P.M. I made a
little Excursion in the pinnace along shore towards the Mouth of the
inlet, accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander. We found in a small
Cove several of the Natives, of whom we purchased a quantity of fresh
fish; and upon our return to the Ship found that the Sean had been
equally as Successfull, which we generally haul morning and evening, and
seldom fail of getting fish sufficient for all hands. In the A.M. I made
an Excursion into one of the Bays which lye on the East side of the
inlet, accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander. Upon our landing we
assended a very high hill, from which we had a full View of the passage I
had before discovered, and the land on the opposite shore, which appeared
to be about 4 Leagues from us; but as it was hazey near the Horizon we
could not see far to the South-East. However, I had now seen enough of
this passage to Convince me that there was the Greatest probability in
the World of its running into the Eastern Sea, as the distance of that
Sea from this place cannot Exceed 20 Leagues even to where we where. Upon
this I resolved after putting to Sea to Search this passage with the
Ship. We found on the Top of the Hill a parcel of loose stones, of which
we built a Pyramid, and left in it some Musquet balls, small Shott,
beads, and whatever we had about us that was likely to stand the test of
Time; after this we descended the hill, and found along with Tupia and
the boat's Crew several of the Natives, setting in the most free and
friendly manner imaginable. Tupia always accompanies us in every
Excursion we make, and proves of infinate Service. In our return to the
Ship we visited the Hippa we had seen on Tuesday last, which is situated
on a small Island, or rather a Rock. The inhabitants of this place
invited us ashore with their usual Marks of Friendship, and shew'd us all
over the place; which indeed was soon done, for it was very small, yet it
contain'd a good number of people, and they had in it, Split and hanging
up to dry, a prodidgious quantity of various sorts of small fish, a part
of which they sold to us for such Trifles as we had about us.

Saturday, 27th. Fresh gales, Westerly. This day we got the Tiller
properly secured, which hath been the Employment of the Armourers and
part of the Carpenters since we Anchor'd at this place; the former in
repairing and making new Iron work, and the Latter in fixing a Transom,*
(* A transom is a curved piece of wood which supports the end of the
tiller.) for the want of which the Tiller has often been in danger of
being broke; the Iron braces that supply'd the want of a Transom have
broke every time they have been repair'd. Coopers still employ'd
repairing the Casks; some hands with the Long boat getting on board
Stones to put into the bottom of the bread room to bring the Ship more by
the Stern; while others were employ'd cutting wood, repairing the
rigging, and fishing.

Sunday, 28th. Strong Gales westerly. P.M. fair and Cloudy, the remainder
thick, hazey weather, with much rain.

Monday, 29th. Winds as yesterday. P.M. rainy weather, the remainder fair
and Cloudy. Pretty early in the A.M. an old man, who had made us several
visits upon our first Arrival here, came on board, and told us that one
of our boats had fir'd upon and wounded 2 of their people, one of which
was dead of his wounds. This affair hapned on Sunday was a week, and
never before now came to my Knowledge; on that day the Master and 5 Petty
officers desir'd to have a small boat to go a fishing; but instead of
Keeping within the usual bounds and under the protection of the Ship,
they went over to the Hippa on the Island, from which some of the
inhabitants put off in 2 Canoes, as they thought to attack them; this
Caused the Master to fire, and, according to the report of the old Man,
wounded 2, one of which is since dead; but this last circumstance was
soon after contradicted by another of the Natives, who Mr. Green and
Tupia saw ashore, and I wish this last report may be true, because I find
the reasons for firing upon them are not very Justifiable. This morning I
went out to the Mouth of the Inlet and landed upon the West point, and
from the Top of a pretty high hill which is there I had a view of this
Coast to the North-West. The farthest land I could see in that Quarter
was an Island* (* Stephens Island. Cape Stephens, off which it lies,
forms the western termination of the strait, Cook's, between the two
islands of New Zealand. The Coast between this and Cape Jackson, where
Cook was standing, is thickly indented with inlets of great extent. The
two Capes were named after the Secretaries of the Admiralty.) about 10
Leagues off, and lying pretty near the Main, and is the same as hath been
before mentioned. Between this Island and the place where I was lay some
other Islands close under the Shore, which forms several Bays, where
there appears to be safe Anchorage for Shipping. After I had set the
different points, etc., we Erected upon the Top of the Hill a Tower or
Pile of Stones, in which we left a Piece of Silver Coin, some Musquet
Balls, Beads, etc., and left flying upon it a piece of an old Pendant.
After this we return'd to the Boat, and in our way to the Ship visited
some of the Natives we met with along shore, and purchased of them a
small quantity of fish.

Tuesday, 30th. Winds at North-West, Gentle breezes, and fair weather.
Early in the A.M. a boat was sent to one of the Islands to get Sellery to
boil for the People's breakfasts. While our people were gathering it near
some empty huts about 20 of the Natives landed there--Men, Women, and
Children. They had no sooner got out of their Canoe than 5 or 6 Women set
down together, and cut and sacrificed themselves--viz., their Legs,
Shins, Arms, and Faces, some with Shells, and others with pieces of
Jaspar. So far as our people could understand them, this was done on
account of their husbands being lately killed and devoured by their
Enemies. While the women was performing this Ceremony, the Men went about
repairing the Huts without showing the least Concern. The Carpenter went
with part of his people into the Woods to cut and Square some Timber to
saw into boards for the use of the Ship, and to prepare two Posts to be
set up with inscriptions on them.

Wednesday, 31st. Little wind and Variable. In the P.M. the Carpenters
having prepared the 2 Posts with inscriptions upon them, setting forth
the Ship's Name, Month, and Year, one of them was set up at the Watering
Place, on which was hoisted the Union flag; and in the Morning I took the
other over to the Island which is known by the name of Motuouru, and is
the one that lies nearest to the Sea; but before I attempted to set up
the Post I went first to the Hippa, having Dr. Monkhouse and Tupia along
with me. We here met with the old Man I have before spoke of. The first
thing I did was to inquire after the Man said to be kill'd by our people,
and the one that was wounded at the same time, when it did not appear to
me that any such accidents had happened. I next (by means of Tupia)
explain'd to the old Man and several others that we were Come to set up a
Mark upon the Island, in order to shew to any ship that might put into
this place that we had been here before. They not only gave their free
Consent to set it up, but promised never to pull it down. I then gave
every one a present of one thing or another; to the old man I gave
Silver, three penny pieces dated 1763, and Spike Nails with the King's
Broad Arrow cut deep in them; things that I thought were most likely to
remain long among them. After I had thus prepared the way for setting up
the post, we took it up to the highest part of the Island, and after
fixing it fast in the ground, hoisted thereon the Union flag, and I
dignified this Inlet with the name of Queen Charlotte's Sound, and took
formal possession of it and the Adjacent lands in the Name and for the
use of his Majesty. We then drank her Majesty's health in a Bottle of
wine, and gave the Empty bottle to the old man (who had attended us up
the hill), with which he was highly pleased. Whilst the Post was setting
up we asked the old man about the Strait or Passage into the Eastern sea,
and he very plainly told us there was a Passage, and as I had some
Conjectures that the lands to the South-West of this Strait (which we are
now at) was an Island, and not a Continent, we questioned the old Man
about it, who said it consisted of two Wannuas, that is 2 lands or
Islands that might be Circumnavigated in a few days, even in 4. This man
spoke of 3 lands, the 2 above mentioned which he called Tovy-poinammu,*
(* The two Wannuas were doubtless the peninsulas lying west of Queen
Charlotte's Sound. The third was the North Island. Te Wai Pounamu (The
Water of the Greenstone, of which the most prized weapons were made) is
the native name of the Middle Island; but there must have been some
confusion as to the possibility of getting round this in four days. The
name of the North Island is Te Ika o Maui (The Fish of Maui), but is
given by Cook as Aeheino Mouwe. It has been suggested (Rusden) that the
name given to him was Tehinga o Maui (The Fishing of Maui), and
imperfectly rendered.) which Signifies green Talk or Stone, such as they
make their Tools or ornaments, etc., and for the third he pointed to the
land on the East side of the Strait; this, he said, was a large land, and
that it would take up a great many Moons to sail round it; this he called
Aeheino Mouwe, a name many others before had called it by. That part
which borders on the strait he called Teiria Whitte. After we had done
our business upon the Island we returned on board, bringing the old Man
along with us, who after dinner went ashore in a Canoe that came to
attend upon him.

[February 1770.]

Thursday, February 1st. P.M. having compleated the Ship with wood, and
filled all our water, the Boatswain was sent ashore with a party of Men
to cut and make brooms, while others were Employ'd about the rigging,
fishing, etc. In the night and the remainder of the day had a Strong Gale
from the North-West, attended with very much rain.

Friday, 2nd. In the P.M. the Gale increased to a Storm, attended with
rain and squalls, which came down in Excessive heavy gusts from off the
high land, in one of which the hawser we had fast to the shore broke;
this obliged us to let go another Anchor. Towards midnight the Gale
moderated, and in the morning it fell Calm, and we took up the Sheet
Anchor, looked at the best bower, and moored the ship again to the Shore.
The heavy rain, which both fell and Continues to fall, hath caused the
Brook we water'd at to overflow its banks, and carry away 10 small Casks
we had Standing there full of Water, and notwithstanding we searched the
whole Cove, we could not find one of them.

Saturday, 3rd. Winds Northerly, mostly fair weather. Very early in the
A.M. sent the Long boat for Sellery to boil for the Ship's Company's
breakfast, and as I intended sailing the first opportunity, I went over
to the Hippa, which is on the East side of the sound, and purchased of
the inhabitants a quantity of split and half dry'd fish, and such as I
could get. While we were at this Hippa, Tupia made farther enquiry about
the Lands and Strait, and these people confirm'd everything the old Man
had before told us. About noon we took our leave of them, which some
seem'd not sorry for; notwithstanding they sold us their fish very
freely, there were some few among them who shew'd evident signs of
disapprobation.

Sunday, 4th. Winds Northerly, a fresh breeze and fair weather. In the
P.M., after returning from the Hippa, some of us made an Excursion along
shore to the Northward, in order to Traffic with the Natives for fish, in
which we had no great Success. In the evening got everything off from the
Shore, designing to sail in the Morning, but the wind not permitting, we
amused ourselves in fishing, collecting of shells, etc.

Monday, 5th. Winds and weather as Yesterday. In the A.M. Cast off the
Hawser, hove short on the Bower, and carried out the Kedge Anchor, in
order to warp the Ship out of the Cove. All the dry fish we have been
able to procure from the Natives since we came here were this day divided
amongst the Ship's Company.

Tuesday, 6th. At 2 p.m. hove up the Anchor, warped the Ship out of the
Cove, and got under Sail, but it soon after falling little wind, and that
very Variable, we anchor'd again a little above Motu-ouru. The old man,
seeing us under sail, came on board to take his leave of us. Amongst
other conversation that passed between him and Tupia, he was asked if
either he or any of his Ancestors had ever seen or heard of any Ship like
this being in these parts; to which question he answer'd in the Negative,
but said that his Ancestors had told him that there came once to this
place a small Vessel from a distant part, wherein were 4 Men that were
all kill'd upon their landing; and being asked where this distant land
lay, he pointed to the North, intimating that it would take up a great
many days to go thither. Something of this land was mentioned by the
People of the Bay of Islands, who said that some of their Ancestors had
been there; but it is very clear to us that there knowledge of this land
is only traditionary.* (* This was doubtless the tradition current among
the Maoris, that their ancestors came from islands to the north. See Note
below.) Had it Calm all night until 6 o'clock in the Morning, when a
light breeze sprung up at North, and we got again under sail; but as the
wind proved very unsteady, we got no farther than just without Motu-ouru
by noon, but had a fair prospect of getting clear out of the Sound, which
I shall next describe.

DESCRIPTION OF QUEEN CHARLOTTE'S SOUND.

The entrance of this Sound is situated in the Latitude of 41 degrees
South and Longitude 184 degrees 45 minutes West, and near the middle of
the South-West side of the Strait before mentioned. The land off the
South-East head of the Sound called by the Natives, Koamaroo (off which
lies 2 Small Islands and some rocks) makes the Narrowest part of the
Strait. There stretcheth out 2 Miles North-East by North from the
North-West head a reef of rocks, a part of which is above Water. This
account of the 2 Heads will be found sufficient guide to know this sound,
which is 3 Leagues broad at the Entrance, and lies in South-West by
South-South-West, and West-South-West at least 10 Leagues, and is a
collection of some of the finest harbours in the world, as will evidently
appear from the plan which was taken with all the accuracy that time and
Circumstances would admit. The Harbour or Cove in which we lay, called
Ship Cove, is not inferior to any in the Sound, both in point of Security
and other Conveniences. It lies on the West side of the Sound, and is the
Southermost of 3 Coves lying within Motu-ouru, which Island bears East
from it. You may sail into this Cove either between this last mentioned
Island and the Isle Hamote, or Long Island, or between Motuouru and the
West shore; in this last Channell are 2 Ledges of Rocks 3 fathoms under
water, but they may be known by the Sea Weed which grows upon them. In
sailing in or out of this sound with little wind attention must be had to
the Tides, which flow 9 or 10 o'Clock full and Change of the Moon, and
rises and falls upon a Perpendicular 7 or 8 feet. The flood comes in
through the Strait from the South-East, and sets strong over upon the
North-West Head and the reef laying off it; the Ebb sets with great
rapidity to the South-East over upon the Islands and Rocks lying off the
South-East Head. The Variation of the Compass from good observations we
found to be 13 degrees 5 minutes East. The land about this Sound is of
such height that we first saw it at the distance of 20 Leagues. It
consists wholy of high hills and deep Valleys, well stored with a variety
of excellent Timber, fit for all purposes except Ships' Masts, for which
use it is too hard and heavy. The Sea abounds with a variety of fish, and
in such plenty that, without going out of the Cove where we lay, we
caught daily, what with the Sean, Hook, and Lines, quite sufficient for
all hands, and upon our first arrival we found plenty of Shags and some
few other Wild Fowls, which to people in our situation was fresh food not
to be dispised. The Number of Inhabitants hardly exceeds 300 or 400
People. They live dispers'd along the Shore in search of their daily
bread, which is fish and firn roots, for they Cultivate no part of the
lands. Upon the appearance of danger they Retire to their Hippas or
strongholds, for in this situation we found them, and they remain'd so
for some days after. This people are poor when compared to many we have
seen, and their Canoes are mean and without ornament. The little Traffick
we had with them was wholy for fish, for we saw little else they had to
dispose of. They had some knowledge of Iron, for they very readily took
Nails in Exchange for fish, and sometimes Prefer'd them to anything else,
which was more than the people of any other place would do. They were at
first fond of Paper, but when they found it spoile by being wet they
would not take it; nor did they set much value upon the cloth we got at
George's Island, but shew'd an extraordinary fondness for English broad
cloth and red Kersey, which shew'd them to be a more sensible People than
many of their Neighbours. Besides the common dress, many of these People
wore on their Heads round Caps made of Birds' feathers, which were far
from being unbecoming.* (* Cook was not able to explore the whole of
Queen Charlotte's Sound, which runs into the land for 25 miles. Towards
the southern end is Picton, the port of Blenheim, the capital of the
province of Marlborough.)

[In Cook's Strait, New Zealand.]

Wednesday, 7th. In the P.M. had a light breeze at North by West, with
which we got out of the Sound and stood over to the Eastward, in order to
get the Strait well open before the tide of Ebb Made. At 7 the 2 Small
Islands which lies off Cape Koamaroo, or the South-East head of Queen
Charlotte's Sound, bore East, distant 4 miles. At this time we had it
nearly Calm, and the tide of Ebb making out, we were Carried by the
Rapidity of the Stream in a very short time close upon one of the
Islands,* (* The Brothers. There is now a lighthouse on this island.)
where we narrowly escaped being dashed against the Rocks by bringing the
Ship to an Anchor in 75 fathoms Water, with 150 fathoms of Cable out.
Even this would not have saved us had not the Tide, which first set South
by East, by meeting with the Island changed its direction to South-East,
and carried us past the first point. When the Ship was brought up she was
about 2 Cables' Lengths of the Rocks and in the Strength of the Stream,
which set South-East at least 4 or 5 Knotts or miles per Hour. A little
before 12 o'Clock the Tide abated, and we began to heave; by 3 the Anchor
was at the bows, and having a light breeze at North-West, we made sail
over for the Eastern Shore; but having the tide against us we made but
little way. The wind afterwards freshned, and Came to North and
North-East, with which and the tide of Ebb we were in a short time
hurried thro' the narrowest part of the Strait, and then stood away for
the Southermost land we had in sight, which bore from us South by West.
Over this land appeared a Prodigious high Mountain,* (* The Kairoura
Range, the summit of which is 9500 feet high.) the Summit of which was
covered with snow. The narrowest part of the Strait we have passed lies
between Cape Koamaroo on Tovy-poinammu and Cape Teerawhitte on
Aeheino-mouwe; the distance from the one to the other I judged to be
between 4 and 5 Leagues. And notwithstanding the strength of the Tides,
now that is known, there is no great danger in passing it; in the doing
of which I am of opinion that the North-East Shore is the safest to keep
upon, for upon that side there appeared no danger, whereas on the other
shore there are not only the Islands and Rocks lying off Cape Koamaroo,
for I discover'd from the hill from which I had the Second View of the
Strait, a Reef of Rocks stretching from these Islands 6 or 7 Miles to the
Southward, and lay about 2 or 3 Miles off from the Shore. I shall not
pretend here to assign limits to the length of this Strait; a view of the
Chart will best illustrate that. About North 9 Leagues from Cape
Teerawhitte, under the same shore, is a high remarkable Island, that may
be distinctly seen from Queen Charlotte Sound, from which it lies
North-East by East 1/4 East, distant 6 or 7 Leagues. I have called it
Entry Isle, and was taken Notice of when we first past it on Sunday 14th
of last Month. On the East side of Cape Teerawhitte the Land Trends away
South-East by East about 8 Leagues, where it ends in a point, and is the
Southermost land on Aeheinomouwe, which I have named Cape Pallisser in
Honour of my worthy friend Capt. Pallisser.* (* Captain Palliser,
afterwards Sir Hugh, was Captain of the Eagle, Cook's first ship in the
Royal Navy. He discovered Cook's talents, and was his warm friend
throughout his life. Between Cape Teerawhitte and Cape Palliser is the
entrance to Port Nicholson, wherein is situated Wellington, the capital
of New Zealand. This entrance is, however, narrow, and Cook was never
near enough to the land to discover it.) Latitude 41 degrees 34 minutes,
Longitude 183 degrees 58 minutes, it bore from us this day at Noon South
79 degrees East, distant 12 or 13 Leagues, being then in the Latitude of
41 degrees 27 minutes South; at the same time Cape Koamaroo bore North
1/2 East, distant 7 or 8 Leagues. The Southermost point of land in sight
bore South 16 degrees West, and the snowy Mountain South-West being about
3 Leagues from the shore and abreast of a Deep Bay or inlet called Cloudy
bay, in the bottom of which appear'd low land cover'd with tall Trees.

Thursday, 8th. In the P.M. had a fresh breeze at North-North-East and
Cloudy weather. At 3 o'Clock was abreast of the Southermost point of land
set at Noon, which I named Cape Campbell, Latitude 41 degrees 42 minutes
South, Longitude 184 degrees 47 minutes West, it lies South by West,
distant 12 or 13 Leagues from Cape Koamaroo, and together with Cape
Pallisser forms the Southern Entrance of the Straits; the Distance of the
one to the other is 13 or 14 Leagues West by South and East by North.
From this Cape we steer'd along Shore South-West by South until 8
o'Clock, when the wind died away; but an Hour after a fresh breeze sprung
up at South-West, and we put the Ship right before it. The reason of my
doing this was owing to a notion, which some of the Officers had just
started, that Aeheinomouwe was not an Island; founding their opinion on a
supposition that the land might extend away to the South-East from
between Cape Turnagain and Cape Pallisser, there being a space of about
12 or 13 leagues which we had not seen. For my own part, I had seen so
far into this Sea the first time I discover'd the Strait, together with
many other Concurrent testimonies of its being an Island, that no such
supposition ever enter'd my thoughts; but being resolved to clear up
every doubt that might Arise on so important an Object, I took the
opportunity of the Shifting of the Wind to Stand to the Eastward, and
accordingly steer'd North-East by East all night. At 9 o'Clock A.M. we
were abreast of Cape Pallisser, where we found the Land trend away
North-East towards Cape Turnagain, which I reckon'd to be distant from us
about 26 Leagues, but as the weather was hazey so that we could not see
above 4 or 5 Leagues ahead, we Still kept standing to the North-East,
with a light breeze at South. At Noon Cape Pallisser bore North 72
degrees West, distant 3 Leagues; our Latitude by account is 41 degrees 30
minutes South.

[Complete the Circuit of North Island, New Zealand.]

Friday, 9th. Gentle breezes at South and South-South-East, hazey Cloudy
weather. In the P.M. 3 Canoes came off to the Ship, wherein were between
30 and 40 of the Natives, who had been pulling after us sometime. It
appeared from the behaviour of these people that they had heard of our
being upon the Coast, for they came alongside, and some of them on board
the Ship, without shewing the least signs of fear. They were no sooner on
board than they asked for Nails, but when Nails was given them they asked
Tupia what they were, which was plain that they had never seen any
before; yet they not only knowed how to ask for them, but know'd what use
to make of them, and therefore must have heard of Nails, which they call
Whow, the name of a Tool among them made generally of bone, which they
use as a Chisel in making Holes, etc. These people asking so readily for
Nails proves that their connections must extend as far North as Cape
Kidnapper, which is 45 Leagues, for that was the Southermost place on
this side the coast we had any Traffick with the Natives; and it is most
probable that the inhabitants of Queen Charlotte's sound got the little
knowledge they seem'd to have of Iron by the Connections they may have
with the Teerawhitteans bordering upon them; for we have no reason to
think that the inhabitants of any part of this land had the least
knowledge of Iron before we came amongst them. After a short stay these
people were dismissed with proper presents, and we continued our Course
along shore to the North-East until 11 o'Clock A.M., when the weather
clear'd up, and we saw Cape Turnagain bearing North by East 1/4 East,
distant 7 Leagues. I then called the Officers upon deck, and asked them
if they were now satisfied that this land was an Island; to which they
answer'd in the Affirmative, and we hauled our wind to the Eastward.* (*
The Endeavour had now completely circumnavigated the North Island of New
Zealand, having spent four months in the exploration. That Cook had
communicated his enthusiasm to his officers is evident; or, knowing his
determination to leave nothing doubtful, they would not have started the
idea that the North Island might not be really an island. The natural
wish after so many months' absence from civilization must have been to
get back to it, and to take things for granted that would otherwise delay
their progress.) At Noon our Latitude by observation was 40 degrees 55
minutes South, which is 21 Miles to the Southward of Cape Turnagain, it
bearing North by East, and Cape Pallisser by this day's run bears South
43 degrees West, 19 or 20 Leagues.

Saturday, 10th. Gentle breezes at South-East and Cloudy weather. At 4
P.M. Tack'd and stood South-West until 8 A.M., when being not above 3 or
4 Miles from the Shore we Tack'd, and stood off 2 hours, and then stood
again to the South-West until noon, when being in the Latitude of 41
degrees 13 minutes South, and about 2 Miles from the Shore, the land of
Cape Pallisser bearing South 53 degrees West, had 26 fathoms of water.

Sunday, 11th. P.M. had light breeze from the South-East. In the night it
was Calm until 9 a.m., when a Gentle breeze sprung up at East-North-East,
with which we made sail to the Southward, having a large swell rolling in
from that Quarter. At Noon was in the Latitude of 41 degrees 6 minutes
South, distant from the Shore 1 1/2 Leagues; a remarkable hillock,* (*
Castle Point.) which stands close to the Sea, bore North 1/2 East,
distance 4 Leagues. At this time 2 Canoes came alongside the Ship, with
whom we had some little Traffic, and then dismissed them.

Monday, 12th. Most part of P.M. had a fresh breeze at North-East, which
by sunset carried us the length of Cape Pallisser, and as the weather was
clear I had an opportunity of Viewing the land of this Cape, which is of
a height Sufficient to be seen in clear weather 12 or 14 Leagues, and is
of a broken and hilly surface. Between the foot of the high land and the
Sea is a border of low, flat land, off which lies some rocks, that appear
above water. Between this Cape and Cape Turnagain the land near the shore
is in many places low and flatt, and appear'd green and pleasant; but
inland are many Hills. From Cape Pallisser to Cape Teerawhitte the land
is tollerable high, making in Table-points, and the Shore forms 2 Bays;
at least it appear'd so, for we were always too far off this part of the
Coast to be particular.* (* The northern of these was the entrance to
Port Nicholson, the harbour of Auckland.) The wind continued at
North-East until 12 at Night, when it died away, and veer'd round to the
West, and afterwards to South and South-South-East little wind, so that
by noon we had advanced no farther than 41 degrees 52 minutes South
Latitude. Cape Pallisser bearing North, distant 5 Leagues, and the Snowy
mountain bore South 83 degrees West.

Tuesday, 13th. P.M. light Airs at South-East, the remainder Calm. At Noon
found ourselves in the Latitude of 42 degrees 2 minutes South, Cape
Pallisser bearing North 20 degrees East, distant 8 Leagues.

Wednesday, 14th. P.M. a fresh breeze sprung up at North-East, and we
Steer'd South-West by West for the Southermost land we had in sight,
which bore from us at sunset South 74 degrees West. At this time we found
the Variation to be 15 degrees 4 minutes East. At 8 A.M. it fell Calm; at
this time we had run 21 Leagues South 58 degrees West since Yesterday at
noon, which brought us abreast of the high Snowy mountain, it bearing
from us North-West in this direction. It lay behind a Mountainous ridge
of nearly the same height, which riseth directly from the Sea, and runs
Parrallel with the Shore, which lies North-East 1/2 North and South-West
1/2 South. The North-East end of the ridge takes its rise but a little
way inland from Cape Campbell. These mountains are distinctly seen both
from Cape Koamaroo and Cape Pallisser, being distant from the former
South-West 1/2 South 22 Leagues, and from the Latter West-South-West 30
Leagues: but they are of a height sufficient to be seen at a much greater
distance. By some on board they are thought to be much higher than the
Peak of Teneriffe, which I cannot agree to; neither do I think them so
high as Mount Egmont, on the South-West Coast of Aeheinomouwe, founding
my opinion on the summit of the Latter being almost wholy covered with
Snow, whereas it only lies upon these in patches.* (* The highest peak of
the Kaikoura Mountains, Mount Tapuaepuka, is 9500 feet high. It is
therefore higher than Mount Egmont, but not so high as the Peak of
Teneriffe. The snow lies thicker on the western side of New Zealand
mountains, so Cook's parallel was fallacious. The Endeavour was now near
the Kaikoura Peninsula, where a small town stands at the present day, the
shipping port of an agricultural district.) At noon was in the Latitude
of 42 degrees 34 minutes South; the Southermost land we had in sight bore
South-West 1/2 West, and some low land that made like an Island lying
close under the foot of the Ridge North-West by North, distant about 5 or
6 Leagues.

Thursday, 15th. In the P.M. 4 Double Canoes, in which were 57 Men, came
off to the Ship; they kept at the distance of about a Stone's throw from
us, and would not be prevailed upon to put alongside by all that Tupia
could say to them. From this we concluded that they never had heard of
our being upon the coast. At 8 p.m. a breeze sprung up at
South-South-West, with which we Stretched off South-East, because some on
board thought they saw land in that Quarter. We continued on this course
until 6 A.M., at which time we had run 11 Leagues, but saw no land but
that which we had left. Soon after this it fell calm, and continued so
for an hour; then a light breeze sprung up at West, which afterwards
veer'd to the North, and we stood to the Westward. At Noon our Latitude
by Observation was 42 degrees 56 minutes South, and the High Land we were
abreast of yesterday at Noon, North-North-West 1/2 West.

Friday, 16th. In the P.M. had a light breeze North-East, with which we
steer'd West, edging in for the land, which was distant from us about 8
Leagues. At 7 o'Clock the Southermost Extream of the land in sight bore
West-South-West, being about 6 Leagues from the Shore; soon after this it
fell Calm, and continued so most part of the night, with sometimes light
Airs from the land. At daylight we discover'd land bearing South by West,
and seemingly detached from the Coast we were upon; at 8 o'Clock a breeze
sprung up at North by East, and we steer'd directly for it. At Noon was
in the Latitude of 43 degrees 19 minutes South; the Peak on the Snowy
Mountains bore North 20 degrees East, distant 27 Leagues; the Southern
Extremity we could see of that land bore West, and the land discover'd in
the morning, making like an Island, extending from South-South-West to
South-West by West 1/2 West, distant about 8 Leagues; our Course and
distance sail'd since yesterday at Noon South-West by West, 43 Miles;
Variation by this Morning's Amplitude 14 degrees 39 minutes East.

[Off Banks Peninsula, New Zealand.]

Saturday, 17th. P.M. stood to the Southward for the land above mention'd,
with the wind at North, a fresh breeze and Clear weather. At 8 o'Clock we
had run 11 Leagues since Noon, when the land extended from South-West by
West to North by West, being distant from the nearest shore about 3 or 4
Leagues; in this situation had 50 fathoms, a fine sandy bottom. Soon
after this it fell Calm, and continued so until 6 A.M., when a light
breeze sprung up at North-West, which afterwards veer'd to North-East. At
sun rise, being very Clear, we plainly discover'd that the last mentioned
land was an Island by seeing part of the Land of Tovy-poenammu open to
the Westward of it, extending as far as West by South. At 8 o'Clock the
Extreams of the Island bore North 76 degrees West and North-North-East
1/2 East, and an opening that had the Appearance of a Bay or Harbour,
lying near the South point North 20 degrees West, distant 3 or 4 Leagues,
being in 38 fathoms, a brown Sandy bottom. This Island,* (* It is not an
island, but a mountainous peninsula, still called after Mr. Banks, but
from the lowness of the land it adjoins, looks like an island. On the
north side is the fine harbour of Lyttelton, the port of Christchurch, a
town of nearly 40,000 inhabitants. The harbour on the south side, that
Cook saw, is Akaroa, a magnificent port.) which I have named after Mr.
Banks, lies about 5 Leagues from the Coast of Tovy poenammu; the South
point bears South 21 degrees West from the higher peak on the Snowy
Mountain so often mention'd, and lies in the Latitude of 43 degrees 52
minutes South and in the Longitude of 186 degrees 30 minutes West, by
observations made of the Sun and Moon this morning. It is of a circular
figure, and may be about 24 Leagues in Compass; the land is of a height
sufficient to be seen 12 or 15 Leagues, and of a very broken, uneven
Surface, and hath more the appearance of barrenness than fertility. Last
night we saw smoke up it, and this morning some people, and therefore
must be inhabited. Yesterday Lieutenant Gore, having the Morning Watch at
the time we first saw this Island, thought he saw land bearing
South-South-East and South-East by East; but I, who was upon Deck at the
same time, was very Certain that it was only Clouds, which dissipated as
the Sun rose. But neither this, nor the running 14 Leagues to the South,
nor the seeing no land to the Eastward of us in the Evening, could
Satisfy Mr. Gore but what he saw in the morning was, or might be, land;
altho' there was hardly a possibility of its being so, because we must
have been more than double the distance from it at that time to what we
were either last night or this morning, at both of which times the
weather was Exceeding Clear, and yet we could see no land either to the
Eastward or Southward of us. Notwithstanding all this, Mr. Gore was of
the same opinion this morning; upon this I order'd the Ship to be wore,
and to be steer'd East-South-East by Compass on the other Tack, the point
on which he said the land bore at this time from us.* (* Another instance
of the general desire to leave nothing unexplored.) At Noon we were in
the Latitude of 44 degrees 7 minutes South; the South point of Banks
Island bore North, distant 5 Leagues.

Sunday, 18th. Gentle breezes at North and fair weather. P.M. stood
East-South-East in search of Mr. Gore's imaginary land until 7 o'clock,
at which time we had run 28 Miles since Noon; but seeing no land but that
we had left, or signs of any, we bore away South by West, and continued
upon that Course until Noon, when we found ourselves in the Latitude of
45 degrees 16 minutes South. Our Course and distance sail'd since
Yesterday is South 8 minutes East, 70 Miles; the South point of Banks
Island North 6 degrees 30 minutes West, distant 28 Leagues; Variation per
Amplitude this Morning 15 degrees 30 minutes. Seeing no signs of Land, I
thought it to no purpose standing any farther to the Southward, and
therefore hauled to the Westward, thinking we were far enough to the
Southward to weather all the land we had left; but this opinion was only
founded on the information we had had from the Natives of Queen
Charlotte's sound.* (* The ship was still 250 miles from the south point
of New Zealand.)

Monday, 19th. P.M. had a Moderate breeze at North-North-West and North
until 8 o'clock, when it fell little wind, and was very unsettled until
10, at which time it fix'd at South, and freshen'd in such a manner that
before the morning it brought us under our close reeft Topsails. At 8
a.m. having run 28 Leagues upon a West by North 1/2 North Course, and now
judging ourselves to be to the Westward of the Land of Tovy Poenammu, we
bore away North-West with a fresh Gale at South. At 10 o'clock, having
run 11 Miles upon this Course, we saw land extending from the South-West
to the North-West at the distance of about 10 Leagues from us, which we
hauled up for. At Noon our Latitude per observation was 44 degrees 38
minutes South; the South-East point of Banks Island bore North 59 degrees
30 minutes East, distant 30 Leagues, and the Main body of the land in
sight West by North. Course and distance sail'd since Yesterday at Noon
is North 66 degrees 45 minutes West, 96 Miles.

[Off Timaru, Middle Island, New Zealand.]

Tuesday, 20th. All P.M. had little wind, which veer'd round from South by
East to North-North-East. Steer'd South-South-West, but got very little
to the Southward on account of a head Sea. At 2 o'Clock sounded in 35
fathoms, fine sandy Bottom, being about 6 Leagues from the land. At 7
o'Clock the Extreams of the land extending from South-West by South to
North by West, distant from the nearest shore 6 Leagues, depth of water
32 fathoms. At 12 o'Clock it fell Calm, and continued so until 4 A.M.,
when a fresh breeze sprung up at South by West, with which we stood in
shore West by South, 4 Leagues, our Depth of Water from 32 to 13 fathoms.
In this last Depth we Tack'd and Stood off, being about 3 Miles from the
Shore, which lies nearly North and South, and is here very low and flatt,
and continues so up to the skirts of the hills, which are at least 4 or 5
Miles inland. The whole face of the Country appears barren, nor did we
see any signs of inhabitants.* (* This is a little south of Timaru, a
rising town in a fertile district; so deceptive is appearance from the
sea.) Latitude at Noon 44 degrees 44 minutes South; Longitude made from
Banks' Island to this land 2 degrees 22 minutes West.

Wednesday, 21st. Wind at South. A fresh Gale at 2 p.m., being in 50
fathoms, and 12 Leagues from the land, we tack'd and stood in Shore until
8 o'Clock, when we Tack'd and Stood off until 4 a.m.; then Tack'd and
Stood in, at 8 o'Clock being 10 Leagues from the Land; had 57 fathoms. At
Noon, being in the Latitude 44 degrees 35 minutes, and 5 or 6 Leagues
from the land, had 36 fathoms; notwithstanding we have Carried as much
sail as the Ship could bear, it is apparent from the observed Latitudes
that we have been drove 3 Leagues to leeward since Yesterday.

Thursday, 22nd. Moderate breezes between the South-East and South by
West, and dark gloomy weather, with a Swell from the South-East plying to
windward, keeping between 4 and 12 Leagues from the land; depth of water
from 35 to 53 fathoms, fine sandy bottom. A great many Sea fowl and
Grampusses about the Ship. In the A.M. Condemn'd 60 fathoms of the B.B.
Cable,* (* B.B. stands for Best Bower, one of the principal cables. The
hempen cables of those days were a continual cause of solicitude, and
required great care.) and converted it into Junk; at Noon had no
Observation, but by the land judged ourselves to be about 3 Leagues
farther North than Yesterday.

Friday, 23rd. Winds Southerly, a Gentle breeze, and for the most part
Cloudy weather. At sunset, the weather clearing up, presented to our View
a high peaked Mountain* (* There are so many lofty mountains in this
region that it is impossible to identify this. This ship was now no
farther south than she had been five days earlier.) bearing North-West by
North, and at the same time we saw the Land more Distincter than at any
time we had before, extending from North to South-West by South, the
inland parts of which appear'd to be high and Mountainous. We cannot tell
yet whether or no this land joins to, or makes a part of, the land we
have left; from the accounts received from the Natives of Queen
Charlotte's sound it ought not, because if it did it must have been
impossible for us to have sail'd round it in 4 Days; besides, the
Mountains inland and the soundings off the Coast seem to indicate this
Country to be more extensive than any they spoke of lying to the
Southward. Having a large hollow swell from the South-East, which made me
expect the Wind from the same quarter, we keept plying from 7 to 15
Leagues from the land, depth of Water 44 to 70 fathoms; at Noon our
Latitude, by Observation, was 44 degrees 40 minutes South; Longitude made
from Banks's Island 1 degree 31 minutes West.

Saturday, 24th. Calm until 6 p.m., at which time a light breeze sprung up
at East-North-East, with which we steer'd South-South-East all night,
edging off from the Land because of a hollow swell which we had from the
South-East; depth of water from 60 to 75 fathoms. At daylight the wind
began to freshen, and before noon blowed a fresh Gale, and veer'd to
North-North-East; at 8 a.m. Saw the land extending as far as South-West
by South, which we steer'd directly for, and at Noon we were in the
Latitude of 45 degrees 22 minutes South; the land in sight extending from
South-West 1/2 South to North-North-West making high and hilly. Course
and distance run since Yesterday at Noon is South 15 degrees West, 47
Miles. In the P.M., while we lay becalm'd, Mr. Banks, in a small Boat,
shott 2 Port Egmont Hens, which were in every respect the same sort of
Birds as are found in great Numbers upon the Island of Faro; they are of
a very dark brown plumage, with a little white about the under side of
their wings, and are as large as a Muscovy Duck. These were the first
that we have seen since we arrived upon the Coast of this Country, but we
saw of them for some days before we made land.

[Off Otago, Middle Island, New Zealand.]

Sunday, 25th. In the P.M. Steer'd South-West by South and South-West,
edging in for the land, having the Advantage of a fresh Gale at North,
which I was over desirous of making the most of, and by that means
carried away the Maintop Gallant Mast and Foretopmast Steering Sail Boom;
but these were soon replaced by others. Altho' we keept at no great
Distance from the Shore, yet the weather was so Hazey that we could see
nothing distinct upon the land, only that there were a ridge of Pretty
high Hills lying Parrallel with, and but a little way from, the Sea
Coast, which lies South by West and North by East, and seem'd to End in a
high Bluff point to the Southward, which we run the length of by 8
o'Clock, when, being dark, and not knowing which way the Land Trended, we
brought too for the night, having run 15 Leagues upon a South-West 1/2
West Course since Noon. The point bore at this time West, distant about 5
Miles, depth of Water 37 fathoms, the bottom small pebble stones. At 4
A.M. we made Sail, but by this time the Northerly wind was gone, and was
succeeded by one from the Southward, which proved very Var'ble and
unsteady. At day light the point above mention'd bore North, distant 3
Leagues, and we found that the land trended away from it South-West by
West, as far as we could see. This point of land I have Named Cape
Saunders, in Honour of Sir Charles* (* Admiral Sir Charles Saunders was
First Lord of the Admiralty in 1766. He commanded the fleet at the
capture of Quebec in 1759, in which Cook served.) (Latitude 45 degrees 55
minutes South; Longitude 189 degrees 4 minutes West). It requires no
discription to know it by, the Latitude and the Angle made here by the
Coast will be found quite sufficient; however, there is a remarkable
saddle hill laying near the Shore, 3 or 4 Leagues South-West of the Cape.
From 1 to 4 Leagues North of the Cape the Shore seem'd to form 2 or 3
Bays, wherein there appear'd to be Anchorage and Shelter from South-West,
Westerly, and North-West winds.* (* One of these is Otago Harbour, where
lies Dunedin, perhaps the most important commercial city in New Zealand.)
I had some thoughts of bearing up for one of these places in the morning
when the Wind came to South-West, but the fear of loosing time and the
desire I had of pushing to the Southward, in order to see as much of the
Coast as possible, or, if this land should prove to be an Island, to get
round it, prevented me. Being not far from the Shore all this morning, we
had an Opportunity of Viewing the Land pretty distinctly; it is of a
Moderate height, full of Hills, which appear'd green and Woody, but we
saw not the least signs of inhabitants. At Noon Cape Saunders bore North
30 degrees West, distant 4 Leagues. Latitude per Log, for we had no
Observation, 46 degrees 0 minutes South.

Monday, 26th. In the P.M. had the wind Whifling all round the Compass,
sometimes blowing a fresh Gale, and at other times almost Calm. At 5
o'Clock it fixed at West-South-West, and soon blow'd so hard as to put us
past our Topsails, and to split the foresail all to pieces. After getting
another to the Yard, we continued standing to the Southward under 2
Courses. At 1 A.M. the wind Moderating, set the Topsails with one Reef
out; but soon after day light the Gale increased to a Storm, with heavy
Squalls, attended with rain. This brought us again under our Courses, and
the Main Topsail being Split we unbent it and bent another. At 6 o'Clock
the Southermost land in sight bore West by North, and Cape Saunders bore
North by West, distant 8 Leagues; at Noon it bore North 20 minutes West,
distant 14 Leagues. Latitude observed 46 degrees 35 minutes.

Tuesday, 27th. A very hard gale at South-West by West, and
West-South-West, with heavy squalls attended with Showers of rain, and a
large hollow sea, without the least intermission the whole of this 24
Hours. We continued under our Courses from Noon until 7 P.M., when we
handed the Mainsail, and lay too under the Foresail with the head to the
Southward. Latitude at Noon 46 degrees 54 minutes; Longitude made from
Cape Saunders 1 degree 24 minutes East.

Wednesday, 28th. Strong Gale at South-West, with a large Sea from the
Same quarter. At 7 p.m. made sail under the Courses; at 8 a.m. set the
Topsails close reefed. At Noon, being in the Latitude of 47 degrees 43
minutes South, and Longitude East from Cape Saunders 2 degrees 10
minutes, wore and stood to the Northward.

[March 1770.]

Thursday, March 1st. Winds between the South-West and North-North-West, a
fresh gale. In the P.M. found the Variation to be 16 degrees 34 minutes
East. At 8 Tack'd and Stood to the Southward, with the wind at West,
which before the morning veer'd to North-West, accompanied with hazey
weather and drizzling rain; at day light loosed a reef out of Each
Topsail, and set some of the small sails. At Noon our Latitude by account
was 47 degrees 52 minutes South, and Longitude made from Cape Saunders 1
degree 8 minutes East.

Friday, 2nd. Strong Gales from the West, with heavy Squalls, attended
with showers of rain. In the P.M. Stood to the Southward till half-past
3, when being in the Latitude 48 degrees 0 minutes South and Longitude
188 degrees 00 minutes West, and seeing no Visible signs of Land, we
Tack'd and Stood to the Northward, having a very large swell from the
South-West by West. Soon after we tack'd we close reef'd the Topsails,
and in the night were obliged to hand them, but at day light set them
again. At Noon our Latitude by Observation was 46 degrees 42 minutes
South, Cape Saunders bearing North 46 degrees West, distant 68 Miles.

Saturday, 3rd. P.M. Wind and weather as Yesterday. A.M. quite Moderate,
yet the South-West swell continues, which makes me conjecture that there
is no land near in that quarter. At Noon our Latitude was 46 degrees 42
minutes South, being East of Cape Saunders 1 degree 30 minutes.

Sunday, 4th. At 4 p.m. the Wind coming to the Northward we stood to the
Westward with all the sail we could make. In the morning got up
Topgallant yards, and set the sails; found the Variation to be 16 degrees
16 minutes East. Saw several Whales, Seals, and one Penguin; this bird
was but Small of the sort, but seem'd to be such a one as we had never
seen before. We have seen several Seals since we passed the Straits, but
never saw one upon the whole Coast of Aeheinomouwe. We sounded both in
the Night and the morning, but found no bottom with 150 fathoms Line; at
Noon we saw Cape Saunders bearing North 1/2 West; our Latitude by
observation was 46 degrees 31 minutes South.* (* The Endeavour had been
blown off the land for seven days, and had barely recovered her
position.)

[Off South Part of Middle Island, New Zealand.]

Monday, 5th. Most part of P.M. had a fresh breeze at North by East. Half
past 1 saw Land bearing West by South, which we steer'd for; before dark
we were within 3 or 4 Leagues of it, and seeing no land farther to the
South we were in hopes this would prove the Southern point. At 7 shortned
sail, and kept under an easy sail all night, standing to the
West-South-West, having the wind at North-West, and North-North-West
until 2 a.m., when it fell Calm, and soon after a breeze sprung up at
South-East by South, and daylight coming on we made sail. During the
whole night we saw a large fire upon the land; a certain sign of its
being inhabited. At 7 the Extreams of the land bore from North 38 degrees
East to West 6 minutes South, being distant from the Shore about 3
Leagues. The land appear'd of a Moderate height, and not hilly. At 1/2
past 10 o'Clock the westermost land in sight bore West 1/2 North, distant
7 Leagues; at Noon had fresh Gales at South-South-East, and thick hazey
weather with rain. Our Latitude by account was 46 degrees 50 minutes
South, and Longitude made from Cape Saunders 1 degree 56 minutes West.*
(* The ship was now off the south point of the Middle Island.)

Tuesday, 6th. P.M. Winds at South by East and South-East, and thick hazey
weather until 3 o'clock, when it clear'd up, and we saw the land
extending from North-East by North to North-West 1/2 North, and soon
after low land, making like an Island, bearing West 1/2 South. Keeping on
our Course to the West by South, we in 2 hours' time saw high land over
the low, extending to the Southward as far as South-West by South; we
could not see this land join to that to the Northward of us, there either
being a total seperation, a deep Bay, or low land between them. At 8
o'Clock, being within 3 Leagues of the low land (which we now took to be
an Island* (* Ruapuke Island.)), we Tack'd and stood to the Eastward,
having the wind at South, which proved very unsettled all night; by which
means, and a little bad management, I found the Ship in the morning
considerably farther to the Eastward than I expected, and the wind
afterwards coming to South-West and West-South-West, so that at noon we
found ourselves much about the same place as we were Yesterday, our
Latitude by observation being 46 degrees 50 minutes South, the land
extending from North-East by East to West by North 1/2 North, the nearest
part bearing North, distance 3 Leagues; the land to the South-West just
in sight.

Wednesday, 7th. Light Airs in the South-West quarter. P.M. Clear weather,
remainder dark and Cloudy. In the P.M. found the Variation per several
Azimuths, and the Amplitude to be 15 degrees 10 minutes East, and by the
Amplitude in the morning to be 15 degrees 56 minutes East. Stood to the
South-East until 8 a.m., then tack'd and stood to the North-West; but it
soon after fell Calm, and continued so until noon, when by our account we
were in the Latitude of 47 degrees 6 minutes South, and had made 12 Miles
Easting since Yesterday at Noon.

Thursday, 8th. Light Airs next to a Calm from South-South-East to
North-East, with which we kept Steering to the South-West, but made but
little way because of a swell which took us right ahead. At daylight A.M.
we saw, or thought we saw, from the Masthead, the land which we have left
to the Northward of us joined to that to the South-West of us; and at the
same time we imagined we saw the land extend to the Southward as far as
South-South-West; but after steering this Course until noon we discovered
our Mistake, for there was no land to be seen to the Southward of West,
which Course we now steer'd, being by observation in the Latitude of 47
degrees 12 minutes; Longitude made from Cape Saunders 2 degrees 2 minutes
West.

[Off South Cape of New Zealand.]

Friday, 9th. P.M. Winds at North, a Gentle breeze and Clear weather.
Stood to the Westward until sunset, at which time the Extreams of the
land bore from North by East to West, distant about 7 or 8 Leagues; Depth
of Water 55 fathoms; Variation by the Amplitude 16 degrees 29 minutes
East. The wind now veer'd to the Westward, and as the weather was fine
and Moonlight we kept standing close upon a Wind to the South-West all
night. At 4 a.m. Sounded, and had 60 fathoms; at daylight we discover'd
under our lee bow Ledges of Rocks, on which the Sea broke very high,
extending from South by West to West by South, and not above 3/4 of a
Mile from us; yet upon sounding we had 45 fathoms, a Rocky bottom. The
wind being at North-West we could not weather the Ledge, and as I did not
care to run to leeward, we tackt and made a Trip to the Eastward; but the
wind soon after coming to the North enabled us to go clear of all. Our
soundings in passing within the Ledge was from 35 to 47 fathoms, a rocky
bottom. This Ledge lies South-East, 6 Leagues from the Southermost part
of the Land, and South-East by South from some remarkable hills which
stand near the Shore. These rocks are not the only dangers that lay here,
for about 3 Leagues to the Northward of them is another Ledge of Rocks,
laying full 3 Leagues from the land, whereon the Sea broke very high. As
we passed these rocks in the night at no great distance, and discover'd
the others close under our Lee at daylight, it is apparent that we had a
very fortunate Escape. I have named them the Traps, because they lay as
such to catch unweary Strangers.* (* The dangerous Traps lie south and
east of the South Island of New Zealand. The Endeavour had now at last
got to the southward of the land. There is a small but high rock farther
south, the Snares, that Cook did not sight this voyage.) At Noon our
Latitude per observation was 47 degrees 26 minutes South; Longitude made
from Cape Saunders 3 degrees 4 minutes West, the land in sight--which has
very much the appearance of an Island* (* South or Stewart
Island.)--extending North-East by North to North-West by West, distant
from the Shore about 4 or 5 Leagues; the Eastermost ledge of rocks bore
South-South-East, distant 1 1/2 Leagues; and Northermost North-East 1/2
East, 3 Leagues. This land is of a moderate height, and has a very barren
Aspect; not a Tree to be seen upon it, only a few Small Shrubs. There
were several white patches, on which the sun's rays reflected very
strongly, which I take to be a kind of Marble such as we have seen in
many places of this Country, particularly to the Northward.

Saturday, 10th. P.M. Moderate breezes at North-West by North and North
with which we stood close upon a Wind to the Westward. At sunset the
Southermost point of land, which I afterwards named South Cape,* (* South
Cape is the southern point of Stewart Island. Cook's position for it is
wonderfully exact.) and which lies in the Latitude of 47 degrees 19
minutes South, Longitude 192 degrees 12 minutes West from Greenwich, bore
North 38 degrees East, distant 4 Leagues, and the Westermost land in
sight bore North 2 degrees East. This last was a small Island, lying off
the point of the Main.* (* Long Island, which lies, with others, on the
west side of Stewart Island.) I began now to think that this was the
Southermost land, and that we should be able to get round it by the West,
for we have had a large hollow swell from the South-West ever since we
had the last gale of wind from that Quarter, which makes one think there
is no land in that direction. In the Night it began to blow, so that at
or before daylight we were brought under our 2 Courses; but at 8 a.m. it
fell moderate, and we set the Topsails close Reeft, and the Mizn and Mizn
Staysail being split, we unbent them and bent others. At Noon, the wind
Coming at West, we Tackt and stood to the Northward, having no land in
sight; our Latitude by observation was 47 degrees 33 minutes South,
Longitude West from the South Cape 0 degrees 59 minutes.

Sunday, 11th. Winds between the West and North-West, a fresh Gale, and
Clear weather. Stood away North-North-East close upon a wind without
seeing any land until 2 A.M., when we discover'd an Island bearing
North-West by North, distant 4 or 5 Leagues. Two hours after this we saw
the Land ahead, upon which we Tackt and stood off until 6 o'Clock; then
stood in, in order to take a nearer View of it. At 11, being about 3
Leagues from the land, and the wind seem'd to incline on Shore, we Tackt
and stood off to the Southward. And now we thought that the land to the
Southward, or that we have been sailing round these 2 days past, was an
Island, because there appeared an Open Channell between the North part of
that land and the South part of the other in which we thought we saw the
Small Island we were in with the 6th Instant; but when I came to lay this
land down upon paper from the several bearings I had taken, it appeared
that there was but little reason to suppose it an Island. On the
contrary, I hardly have a doubt but what it joins to, and makes a part
of, the Mainland,* (* Cook was deceived, as Stewart is an island.) the
Western extremity of which bore at Noon North 59 degrees West, and the
Island seen in the Morning* (* This was called by Cook Solander Island.)
South 59 degrees West, distant 5 Leagues. Latitude observed 46 degrees 24
minutes South, Longitude 192 degrees 49 minutes West. It is nothing but a
barren rock of about a Mile in Circuit, remarkably high, and lies full 5
Leagues from the Main. The shore of the Main lies nearest East by South
and West by North, and forms a large open bay, in which there is no
appearance of a Harbour or other place of safety for shipping against
South-West and Southerly winds. The face of the Country bears a very
rugged Aspect, being full of high craggy hills, on the Summits of which
were several patches of Snow. However, the land is not wholy barren; we
could see wood, not only in the Valleys, but on several of the Hills; but
we saw no signs of inhabitants.

Monday, 12th. Fresh Gales between the West and North-West; latter part
squally, with rain. Stood to the South-West by South until 11 a.m., at
which time the wind shifted to the South-West by West. We wore, and stood
to the North-North-West, being then in the Latitude of 47 degrees 40
minutes South, and Longitude 193 degrees 50 minutes West, having a Hollow
Sea from the South-West.

Tuesday, 13th. Strong Gale between the South-West by West and
South-South-West, with a large Hollow sea from the same Quarter. In the
P.M. had frequent Squalls, with Showers of rain; in the night had several
very heavy squalls, attended with Showers of Hail, which obliged us to
take in our Topsails. During the night steer'd North-North-West until 6
a.m., when, seeing no land, we steer'd North by East, and set the Main
Topsail, single reeft. At 8 set the Foretopsail, single reeft, and loosed
all the Reefs out of the Maintopsail, and Steer'd North-East by East 1/2
East in order to make the land. At 10 saw it bearing East-North-East, and
appeared to be very high; but, being hazey over it, we could see nothing
distinct neither now nor at Noon, when, by Observation, we were in the
Latitude of 46 degrees 0 minutes South. Course and distance Sailed since
Yesterday North 5 degrees West, 96 Miles. Longitude made from the South
Cape 1 degree 40 minutes West.

[Off the New Zealand Sounds.]

Wednesday, 14th. In the P.M. had a fresh Gale from the Southward,
attended with Squalls. At 2 it Clear'd up over the land, which appeared
high and Mountainous. At 1/2 past 3 double reeft the Topsails, and hauld
in for a Bay, wherein their appear'd to be good Anchorage, and into which
I had thought of going with the Ship; but after standing in an hour, we
found the distance too great to run before dark, and it blow'd too hard
to attempt it in the night, or even to keep to Windward; for these
reasons we gave it up, and bore away along shore. This bay I have named
Dusky Bay. It lies in the Latitude of 45 degrees 47 minutes South; it is
about 3 or 4 Miles broad at the Entrance, and seems to be full as deep.
In it are several Islands, behind which there must be Shelter from all
winds, provided there is a Sufficient Depth of Water.* (* Dusky Bay is
one of the remarkable inlets known now as the New Zealand Sounds. They
are very deep, narrow fiords, running into the high mountains, that here
come close to the shore, and are much visited now for the sake of the
grandeur of the scenery. Cook visited and surveyed Dusky Bay in his next
voyage. The Endeavour had nearly as much tempestuous weather in rounding
the south end of New Zealand as she had off the North Cape; but Cook
managed to get a very fair idea of the coast, notwithstanding, by dint of
perseverance.) The North point of this bay, when it bears South-East by
South, is very remarkable, there being off it 5 high peaked rocks,
standing up like the 4 fingers and thumb of a Man's hand; on which
account I have named it Point Five Fingers. The land of this point is
farther remarkable by being the only Level land near it, and extends near
2 Leagues to the Northward. It is pretty high, wholy cover'd with wood,
and hath very much the Appearance of an Island, by its aspect being so
very different from the Land behind it, which is nothing but barren rocky
Mountains. At Sunset the Southermost Land in sight bore due South,
distant 5 or 6 Leagues; and as this is the Westermost point of land upon
the whole Coast I have called it West Cape. It lies about 3 Leagues to
the Southward of the bay above-mentioned, in the Latitude of 45 degrees
54 minutes South, and Longitude 193 degrees 17 minutes West. The land of
this Cape seems to be of a moderate height next the Sea, and hath Nothing
remarkable about it that we could see, Except a very White Clift 2 or 3
Leagues to the Southward of it. The land to the Southward of Cape West
trends away towards the South-East; to the Northward of it it Trends
North-North-East and North-East. At 7 o'Clock brought the Ship too under
the Foresail, with her head off Shore, having a fresh Gale at South by
East. At Midnight it moderated, and we wore and lay her head in shore
until 4 a.m.; then made Sail, and Steer'd along shore North-East 1/2
North, having a moderate breeze at South-South-East. At Noon we were by
observation in the Latitude 45 degrees 13 minutes South; Course and
distance sailed since Yesterday North 41 degrees East, 62 Miles;
Longitude made from Cape West 0 degrees 29 minutes East, being at this
time about 1 1/2 Leagues from Shore. Sounded, and had no ground with 70
fathoms Line. A little before Noon we passed a little Narrow opening in
the land, where there appear'd to be a very Snug Harbour,* (* Doubtful
Sound, another of the fiords mentioned in note above.) form'd by an
Island, in the Latitude of 45 degrees 16 minutes South; inland, behind
this Opening, were Mountains, the summits of which were Cover'd with Snow
that seem'd to have fallen lately, and this is not to be wondered at, for
we have found it very cold for these 2 days past. The land on each side
the Entrance of this Harbour riseth almost perpendicular from the Sea to
a very considerable Height; and this was the reason why I did not attempt
to go in with the Ship, because I saw clearly that no winds could blow
there but what was right in or right out, that is, Westerly or Easterly;
and it certainly would have been highly imprudent in me to have put into
a place where we could not have got out but with a wind that we have
lately found to blow but one day in a Month. I mention this because there
was some on board that wanted me to harbour at any rate, without in the
least Considering either the present or future Consequences.

Thursday, 15th. Clear weather, Winds at South-West and South-West by
South, a Gentle breeze, except in the night, when we had variable light
Airs and Calm. In the evening, being about 2 Leagues from the land, we
sounded, but had no ground with 103 fathoms. Variation per Azimuth 14
degrees East, per Amplitude 15 degrees 2 minutes East. With what wind we
had we made the best of our way along shore to the North-East, keeping at
the distance of 2 or 3 Leagues off from the Land. At Noon we were in the
Latitude of 44 degrees 47 minutes, having run only 12 Leagues upon a
North-East 1/4 North Course since Yesterday at Noon; Longitude made from
Cape West 1 degree 3 minutes East.

Friday, 16th. Winds at South-West; a fresh breeze and Clear. Steer'd
along shore North-East 1/4 East until 6 p.m., when we Shortned Sail, and
brought too for the Night. Variation per Azimuth 13 degrees 48 minutes
East. At 4 A.M. made sail, and Stood in for the land. At daylight saw the
appearance of an inlet into the land; but upon a nearer approach found
that it was only a deep Valley, bounded on each side by high lands, upon
which we bore away North-East 1/4 East along shore, keeping about 4 or 5
miles off. At Noon the Northermost point of land in sight bore North 60
degrees East, distant 10 Miles; Latitude per Observation 44 degrees 5
minutes; Longitude made from Cape West 2 degrees 8 minutes East.

Saturday, 17th. Continued our Course along shore, having in the P.M. the
advantage of a fresh Gale at South-West. At 2, past by the point
afore-mentioned, which is of a Moderate height, with deep Red Clifts,
down which falls 4 Small streams of Water, on which account it is named
Cascades Point. Latitude 44 degrees 0 minutes South; Longitude 2 degrees
20 minutes East from Cape West. From this point the land at first Trends
North 76 degrees East, but afterwards more to the Northward
East-North-East, 8 Leagues. From this point and near the Shore lies a
small low Island, which bore from us South by East, distant 1 1/2
Leagues. At 7 o'Clock we Shortned sail, and brought too under the
Topsails, with her head off Shore, having 33 fathoms, and fine sandy
bottom. At 10, had 50 fathoms, and at 12, wore in 65 fathoms, having
drove about 5 Miles North-North-West since we brought too. Two hours
after this had no ground with 140 fathoms; which shews that the soundings
extend but a little way from the land. From 2 to 8 a.m. had it Calm and
hazey, with drizzling rain, at which time a breeze sprung up at
South-West, with which we steer'd along shore North-East by East 1/4
East, keeping about 3 Leagues from the land. At Noon had no Observation,
being Hazey with rain. Our run since Yesterday at Noon is North-East by
East, 55 Miles; Longitude from Cape West 3 degrees 12 minutes East.

[Off West Coast of Middle Island, New Zealand.]

Sunday, 18th. In the P.M. had a fresh breeze at South-West by West,
attended with drizzling rain. At 8, being about 3 Leagues from the land,
shortned sail, and brought too, having run 10 Leagues North-East by East
since noon; at this time had 44 fathoms, and 2 hours before had 17
fathoms, fine sandy bottom, being then about 1 League from the land. Had
it Calm the most part of the Night, and until 10 a.m., when a light
breeze sprung up at South-West by West. We Made sail along shore
North-East by North, having a large swell from the West-South-West, which
had risen in the Night. At Noon Latitude in per Observation 43 degrees 4
minutes South; Course and distance sail'd since Yesterday is North 54
degrees East, 54 Miles; Longitude made from Cape West 4 degrees 12
minutes East. The Mountains and some of the Vallies we observed this
morning were wholy cover'd with Snow, part of which we suppos'd to have
fallen in the P.M. and fore part of the Night, at the time that we had
rain--and yet the weather is not Cold.* (* They did not see Mount Cook,
12,300 feet high, and the highest mountain in New Zealand; no doubt the
summit was in the clouds.)

Monday, 19th. In the P.M. had a fresh breeze at South-West by West and
West-South-West, which we made the most of until 6, when we shortned
sail, and at 10 brought too, and sounded 115 fathoms, judging ourselves
to be about 5 Leagues from the land. At midnight it fell little wind, on
which account we made sail. At 8 a.m. the wind veer'd to the North-West
by North, with which we stood to the North-East close upon a wind until
noon, at which time we Tack'd, being about 3 Leagues from the land, and
by Observation in the Latitude of 42 degrees 8 minutes and Longitude from
Cape West 5 degrees 5 minutes East* (* The Endeavour had passed the mouth
of the Grey River, the district of the great coalfields of New Zealand.)
Course and distance run since Yesterday at Noon North 35 degrees East, 68
Miles; Depth of Water 65 fathoms, the land extending from North-East by
North to South-South-West.

Tuesday, 20th. Fresh Gales at North-West by North and North by West. P.M.
fair weather; the remainder hazey, with rain, and Squall, which brought
us under close Reeft Topsails. Stood to the Westward until 2 a.m., when
we made a Trip to the Eastward, and afterwards stood to the Westward
until Noon, when, by our reckoning, we were in the Latitude of 42 degrees
23 minutes South. Course and distance sail'd South 74 degrees West, 54
Miles; Longitude made from Cape West 5 degrees 55 minutes East. Tack'd
and stood to the Eastward.

Wednesday, 21st. In the P.M. had a fresh Gale at North by West, attended
with rain until 6, when the Wind shifted to South and South-South-West,
and continued to blow a fresh Gale, with which we steer'd North-East by
North until 6 A.M., at which time we haul'd in East by North in order to
make the land which we saw soon after. At Noon our Latitude per Account
was 41 degrees 37 minutes, and Longitude from Cape West 5 degrees 42
minutes East; Course and distance sail'd since Yesterday North 60 degrees
East, 92 miles. At this time we were not above 3 or 4 Leagues from the
land, but being very foggy upon it we could see nothing distinct, and as
we had not much wind, and a prodigious swell rowling in upon the Shore
from the West-South-West, I did not think it safe to go nearer.

Thursday, 22nd. In the P.M. had a Gentle breeze from the
South-South-West, with which we steer'd along shore North-East until 8,
when being about 2 or 3 Leagues from shore we sounded, and had 34
fathoms, upon which we haul'd off North-West by North until 11, then
brought too, having at this time 64 fathoms. At 4 a.m. made sail to the
North-East, wind at South-South-West, a light breeze. At 8 the wind
veer'd to the Westward, and soon after fell Calm; at this time we were
about 3 or 4 Miles from the Shore, and in 54 fathoms, having a large
swell from the West-South-West rowling Obliquely upon the Shore, which
put me under a good deal of Apprehension that we should be obliged to
Anchor; but by the help of a light Air now and then from the South-West
quarter we were Enabled to keep the Ship from driving much nearer the
shore. At Noon the Northermost land in sight bore North-East by East 1/4
East, distant 8 or 10 Leagues; our Latitude by account was 40 degrees 55
minutes South, Longitude from Cape West 6 degrees 35 minutes East; Course
and distance sail'd since Yesterday at Noon North 36 degrees East, 42
Miles; very foggy over the Land.

[Off Cape Farewell, Middle Island, New Zealand.]

Friday, 23rd. Light Airs from the Southward, at intervals Calm, the fore
part hazey, the remainder clear, pleasant weather. At Noon our Latitude,
by observation, 40 degrees 36 minutes 30 seconds South, Longitude from
Cape West 6 degrees 52 minutes East; the Eastermost point of Land in
sight* (* Cape Farewell, the north point of the Middle Island.) bore East
10 degrees North, distant 7 Leagues, and a bluff head or point we were
abreast of yesterday at Noon, off which lay some rocks above Water, bore
South 18 degrees West, distant 6 Leagues. This point I have named Rocks
Point, Latitude 40 degrees 55 minutes South. Having now nearly run down
the whole of this North-West Coast of Tovy Poenammu, it is time I should
describe the face of the Country as it hath at different times appeared
to us. I have mentioned on the 11th Instant, at which time we were off
the Southern part of the Island, that the land seen then was rugged and
mountainous; and there is great reason to believe that the same ridge of
Mountains extends nearly the whole length of the Island from between the
Westermost Land seen that day and the Eastermost seen on the 13th. There
is a space of about 6 or 8 Leagues of the sea Coast unexplored, but the
Mountains inland were Visible enough. The land near the Shore about Cape
West is rather low, and riseth with a gradual assent up to the foot of
the Mountains, and appear'd to be mostly covered with wood. From Point
Five Fingers down to the Latitude of 44 degrees 20 minutes there is a
narrow ridge of Hills rising directly from the Sea, which are Cloathed
with wood; close behind these hills lies the ridge of Mountains, which
are of a Prodidgious height, and appear to consist of nothing but barren
rocks, covered in many places with large patches of Snow, which perhaps
have lain there since the Creation. No country upon Earth can appear with
a more rugged and barren Aspect than this doth; from the Sea for as far
inland as the Eye can reach nothing is to be seen but the Summits of
these rocky Mountains, which seem to lay so near one another as not to
admit any Vallies between them. From the Latitude of 44 degrees 20
minutes to the Latitude 42 degrees 8 minutes these mountains lay farther
inland; the Country between them and the Sea consists of woody Hills and
Vallies of Various extent, both for height and Depth, and hath much the
Appearance of Fertility. Many of the Vallies are large, low, and flatt,
and appeared to be wholy covered with Wood; but it is very probable that
great part of the land is taken up in Lakes, Ponds, etc., as is very
common in such like places. From the last mentioned Latitude to Cape
Farewell, afterwards so Called, the land is not distinguished by anything
remarkable; it rises into hills directly from the Sea, and is covered
with wood. While we were upon this part of the Coast the weather was
foggy, in so much that we could see but a very little way inland;
however, we sometimes saw the Summits of the Mountains above the fogg and
Clouds, which plainly shew'd that the inland parts were high and
Mountainous, and gave me great reason to think that there is a Continued
Chain of Mountains from the one End of the Island to the other.* (* This
is, to a great extent, the case.)

Saturday, 24th. In the P.M. had a Gentle breeze at South-West, which by
Dark run us the length of the Eastern Point set at Noon, and not knowing
what Course the land took on the other side, we brought too in 34 fathoms
about one League from the land. At 8, it falling little wind, we fill'd
and stood on until 12, at which time we brought too until 4 a.m., then
made Sail. At daylight we saw low land extending from the above point to
the East-South-East as far as the Eye could reach, the Eastern Extremity
of which appear'd in round Hillocks; by this time the wind had veer'd to
the Eastward, which obliged us to ply to windward. At Noon the point
above mention'd bore South-West by South, distant 16 miles; Latitude
observ'd 40 degrees 19 minutes South. This point I afterwards named Cape
Farewell, for reasons which will be given in their proper place.

Sunday, 25th. Winds Easterly; towards Noon had little winds and hazey,
with rain. Made several trips, but gain'd nothing to Windward, so that at
Noon our Situation was nearly as Yesterday.

Monday, 26th. At 3 p.m. the wind came to North, and we Steer'd
East-South-East with all the Sail we could set until dark, when we
shortned sail until the morning, having thick Misty weather. All Night we
keept the lead going continually, and had from 37 to 48 fathoms. At day
light we saw the land bearing South-East by East, and an Island laying
near it bearing East-South-East, distant 5 Leagues. This I knew to be the
Island* (* Stephens Island.) seen from the Entrance of Queen Charlotte's
sound, from which it bears North-West by North, Distant 9 Leagues. At
Noon it bore South-East, distant 4 or 5 miles, and the North-West head of
Queen Charlotte's sound bore South-East by South, distant 10 1/2 Leagues;
Latitude ohserv'd 43 degrees 33 minutes South.

[In Admiralty Bay, Middle Island, New Zealand.]

Tuesday, 27th. Fresh breeze of Wind Westerly, and hazey, Misty weather,
with Drizling rain. As we have now Circumnavigated the whole of this
Country, it is time for me to think of quitting it; but before I do this
it will be necessary to compleat our Water first, especially as we have
on board above 30 Tons of Casks empty, and knowing that there is a Bay
between the above-mentioned Island and Queen Charlotte's sound, wherein
no doubt there is Anchorage and convenient Watering places. Accordingly,
in the P.M. we hauled round the Island and into the bay,* (* Admiralty
Bay.) leaving 3 more Islands* (* Rangitoto Islets.) on our Starboard
hand, which lay close under the West Shore 3 or 4 Miles within the
Entrance. As we run in we keept the lead going, and had from 40 to 12
fathoms. At 6 we Anchor'd in 11 fathoms, Muddy bottom, under the West
Shore, in the Second Cove within the fore-mentioned Island. At daylight I
took a Boat and went to look for a Watering place, and a proper birth to
moor the Ship in, both of which I found convenient enough. After the Ship
was moor'd I sent an Officer ashore to Superintend the Watering, and the
Carpenter with his Crew to cut wood, while the Long boat was employed
carrying on shore Empty Casks.

Wednesday, 28th. Winds Westerly, which in the A.M. blow'd a fresh Gale,
attended with rain. Employ'd getting on board Wood and Water and fishing;
in the Latter we were pretty Successfull.

Thursday, 29th. In the P.M. had a Strong Gale from the Westward. A.M.
Variable light Airs from the Eastward and hazey rainy weather the whole
day; which, however, did not prevent us getting on board Wood and Water.

Friday, 30th. Winds at South-East, a moderate breeze; the first and
middle part dark, Hazey weather, with rain; the latter, fair. In the
A.M., as the wind seem'd to be settled at South-East, and having nearly
compleated our Water, we warped the Ship out of the Cove in order to have
room to get under Sail. Before this was done it was Noon, at which time I
went away in the Pinnace, in order to examine the Bay, and to Explore as
much of it as the little time I had would Admit.

Saturday, 31st. In the P.M., after rowing a League and a half or 2
Leagues up the Bay, I Landed upon a point of Land on the West side,
where, from an Eminency, I could see this Western Arm of the Bay run in
South-West by West, about 5 Leagues farther, yet did not see the Head of
it. There appeared to be several other inlets, or at least small bays,
between this and the North-West head of Queen Charlotte's sound, in every
one of which I make no doubt but what there is Anchorage and Shelter for
Shipping, as they are partly cover'd from the Sea wind by these Islands
that lay without them.* (* There is a maze of inlets and harbours between
Admiralty Bay and Queen Charlotte's Sound, a distance of 20 miles.) The
land about this bay, at least what I could see of it, is of a very hilly,
uneven Surface, and appears to be mostly cover'd with wood, Shrubs,
Firns, etc., which renders Travelling both difficult and Fatiguing. I saw
no inhabitants, neither have we seen any since we have been in this bay,
but met with several of their Huts, all of which appear'd to have been at
least 12 Months deserted.

Upon my return to the Ship, in the Evening, I found the Water, etc., all
on board, and the Ship ready for Sea; and being now resolv'd to quit this
Country altogether, and to bend my thought towards returning home by such
a rout as might Conduce most to the Advantage of the Service I am upon, I
consulted with the Officers upon the most Eligible way of putting this in
Execution. To return by the way of Cape Horn was what I most wished,
because by this rout we should have been able to prove the Existance or
Non-Existance of a Southern Continent, which yet remains Doubtfull; but
in order to Ascertain this we must have kept in a higher Latitude in the
very Depth of Winter, but the Condition of the Ship, in every respect,
was not thought sufficient for such an undertaking. For the same reason
the thoughts of proceeding directly to the Cape of Good Hope was laid
aside, especially as no discovery of any Moment could be hoped for in
that rout. It was therefore resolved to return by way of the East Indies
by the following rout: upon Leaving this Coast to steer to the Westward
until we fall in with the East Coast of New Holland, and then to follow
the direction of that Coast to the Northward, or what other direction it
might take us, until we arrive at its Northern extremity; and if this
should be found impracticable, then to Endeavour to fall in with the Land
or Islands discovered by Quiros.* (* Quiros, a Spanish navigator,
discovered in 1605 Espiritu Santo, the northern island of the New
Hebrides, which he supposed to be a part of a great southern continent.
Cook, in his second voyage, thoroughly explored the New Hebrides group;
and for some of the islands his charts are still the only guide.)

With this view, at daylight we got under Sail and put to Sea, having the
Advantage of a fresh Gale at South-East and Clear weather. At Noon the
Island, which lies off the North-West point of the Bay, bore East 9
degrees South, distant 10 Miles; our Latitude, by Observation, was 40
degrees 35 minutes South. This bay I have named Admiralty Bay; the
North-West point Cape Stephens, and the East Point Jackson, after the 2
Secretarys.* (* The two secretaries of the Admiralty, Philip Stephens and
George Jackson, both of whom showed great appreciation of Cook.) It may
always be known by the Island above mentioned, which is pretty high, and
lies North-East, 2 Miles from Cape Stephens; Latitude 40 degrees 37
minutes South; Longitude 185 degrees 6 minutes West. Between this Island
and Cape Farewell, which is West by North and East by South, distant 14
or 15 Leagues from each other, the Shore forms a large deep Bay, the
bottom of which we could hardly see in sailing in a Strait line from the
one Cape to the other; but it is not at all improbable but what it is all
lowland next the Sea, as we have met with less water here than on any
other part of the Coast at the same distance from Land; however, a Bay
there is, and is known on the Chart by the Name of Blind Bay, but I have
reason to believe it to be Tasman's Murderers' Bay.* (* Blind Bay is now
also known as Tasman Bay, and Massacre Bay is supposed to be a smaller
bay in it, on the north-western side.)

Before I quit this land altogether I shall give a short general
discription of the Country, its inhabitants, their manners, Customs,
etc., in which it is necessary to observe that many things are founded
only on Conjecture, for we were too short a time in any one place to
learn much of their interior policy, and therefore could only draw
conclusions from what we saw at different times.

[Description of New Zealand.]

SOME ACCOUNT OF NEW ZEALAND.

Part of the East* (* This should be West Coast.) Coast of this Country
was first discovered by Abel Tasman in 1642, and by him called New
Zeland; he, however, never landed upon it; probably he was discouraged
from it by the Natives killing 3 or 4 of his People at the first and only
place he Anchor'd at. This country, which before now was thought to be a
part of the imaginary Southern Continent, consists of 2 large Islands,
divided from each other by a Strait or Passage of 4 or 5 Leagues broad.
They are situated between the Latitude of 34 and 48 degrees South, and
between the Longitude of 181 and 194 degrees West from the Meridian of
Greenwich. The situation of few parts of the world are better determin'd
than these Islands are, being settled by some hundreds of Observations of
the Sun and Moon, and one of the Transit of Mercury made by Mr. Green,
who was sent out by the Royal Society to observe the Transit of Venus.

The Northermost of these Islands, as I have before observed, is called by
the Natives Aeheinomouwe and the Southermost Tovy Poenammu. The former
name, we were well assured, comprehends the whole of the Northern Island;
but we were not so well satisfied with the latter whether it comprehended
the whole of the Southern Islands or only a part of it. This last,
according to the Natives of Queen Charlotte's Sound, ought to consist of
2 Islands, one of which at least we were to have sail'd round in a few
days; but this was not verify'd by our own Observations. I am inclinable
to think that they know'd no more of this land than what came within the
Limits of their sight.* (* As before remarked, the natives at Queen
Charlotte's Sound doubtless were speaking of the large peninsula and the
islands which lie west of the Sound. There is a spot at the isthmus where
canoes could be hauled over.) The Chart* (* See copy of this chart.)
which I have drawn will best point out the figure and Extent of these
Islands, the situation of the Bays and Harbours they contain, and the
lesser Islands lay about them.

And now I have mentioned the Chart, I shall point out such places as are
drawn with sufficient accuracy to be depended upon and such as are not,
beginning at Cape Pallisser and proceed round Aeheinomouwe by the East
Cape, etc. The Coast between these 2 Capes I believe to be laid down
pretty accurate, both in its figure and the Course and distance from
point to point; the opportunities I had and the methods I made use on to
obtain these requisites were such as could hardly admit of an Error. From
the East Cape to Cape Maria Van Diemen, altho' it cannot be perfectly
true, yet it is without any very Material error; some few places,
however, must be excepted, and these are very Doubtfull, and are not only
here, but in every other part of the Chart pointed out by a Pricked or
broken line. From Cape Maria Van Diemen up as high as the Latitude of 36
degrees 15 minutes we seldom were nearer the Shore than from 5 to 8
Leagues, and therefore the line of the Sea Coast may in some places be
erroneous. From the above Latitude to nearly the Length of Entry Island
we run along and near the shore all the way, and no circumstance occurd
that made me liable to commit any Material error. Excepting Cape
Teerawhitte, we never came near the Shore between Entry Island and Cape
Pallisser, and therefore this part of the coast may be found to differ
something from the truth; in Short, I believe that this Island will never
be found to differ Materially from the figure I have given it, and that
the Coast Affords few or no Harbours but what are either taken notice of
in this Journal, or in some Measure pointed out in the Chart; but I
cannot say so much for Tovy Poenammu. The Season of the Year and
Circumstance of the Voyage would not permit me to spend so much time
about this Island as I had done at the other, and the blowing weather we
frequently met with made it both dangerous and difficult to keep upon the
Coast. However, I shall point out the places that may be Erroneous in
this as I have done in the other. From Queen Charlotte's sound to Cape
Campbell, and as far to the South-West as the Latitude 43 degrees, will
be found to be pretty Accurate; between this Latitude and the Latitude 44
degrees 20 minutes the coast is very Doubtfully laid down, a part of
which we hardly, if at all, saw. From this last mentioned Latitude to
Cape Saunders we were generally at too great a distance to be Particular,
and the weather at the same time was unfavourable. The Coast, as it is
laid down from Cape Saunders to Cape South, and even to Cape West, is no
doubt in many places very erroneous, as we hardly were ever able to keep
near the Shore, and were sometimes blown off altogether. From the West
Cape down to Cape Farewell, and even to Queen Charlotte's sound, will in
most places be found to differ not much from the truth.* (* Cook's open
and plain statement as to the comparative accuracy of different parts of
his chart is much to be commended. It has been too much the fashion with
first explorers to leave such matters to be discovered by the student.
But the astonishing accuracy of his outline of New Zealand must be the
admiration of all who understand the difficulties of laying down a coast;
and when it is considered that this coastline is 2400 miles in extent,
the magnitude of the task will be realised by everybody. Never has a
coast been so well laid down by a first explorer, and it must have
required unceasing vigilance and continual observation, in fair weather
and foul, to arrive at such a satisfactory conclusion; and with such a
dull sailer as the Endeavour was, the six and a half months occupied in
the work must be counted as a short interval in which to do it.)

[Animals, Timber, etc., New Zealand.]

Mention is likewise made in the Chart of the appearance or aspect of the
face of the Country. With respect to Tovy Poenammu, it is for the most
part very Mountainous, and to all appearance a barren Country. The people
in Queen Charlotte's sound--those that came off to us from under the
Snowy Mountain, and the five we saw to the South-West of Cape
Saunders--were all the inhabitants, or Signs of inhabitants, we saw upon
the whole Island; but most part of the Sea Coast of Aeheinomouwe, except
the South-West side, is well inhabited; and although it is a hilly,
Mountainous Country, yet the very Hills and Mountains are many of them
cover'd with wood, and the Soil of the plains and Valleys appear'd to be
very rich and fertile, and such as we had an opportunity to examine we
found to be so, and not very much incumber'd with woods.

It was the Opinion of every body on board that all sorts of European
grain, fruit, Plants, etc., would thrive here; in short, was this Country
settled by an industrious people they would very soon be supplied not
only with the necessaries, but many of the Luxuries, of Life. The Sea,
Bays, and Rivers abound with a great Variety of Excellent Fish, the most
of them unknown in England, besides Lobsters, which were allowed by every
one to be the best they ever had eat. Oysters and many other sorts of
shell fish all Excellent in their kind. Sea and Water Fowls of all sorts
are, however, in no great plenty; those known in Europe are Ducks, Shags,
Gannets, and Gulls, all of which were Eat by us, and found exceeding
good; indeed, hardly anything came Amiss to us that could be Eat by Man.
Land fowl are likewise in no great plenty, and all of them, except
Quails, are, I believe, unknown in Europe; these are exactly like those
we have in England. The Country is certainly destitute of all sorts of
beasts, either wild or tame, except dogs and Rats; the former are tame,
and lived with the people, who breed and bring them up for no other
purpose than to Eat, and rats are so scarce that not only I, but many
others in the Ship, never see one. Altho' we have seen some few Seals,
and once a Sea Lion upon this Coast, yet I believe they are not only very
scarce,* (* There are a good many seals round the southern part of New
Zealand, and a regular fishery is now established on Stewart Island. Cook
saw nothing of the few natives that occupied the southern parts of the
Island.) but seldom or ever come ashore; for if they did the Natives
would certainly find out some Method of Killing them, the Skins of which
they no doubt would preserve for Cloathing, as well as the Skins of Dogs
and birds, the only Skins we ever saw among them. But they must sometimes
get Whales, because many of the Patta Pattoas are made of the bones of
some such fish, and an Ornament they wear at their breast (on which they
set great Value), which are supposed to be made of the Tooth of a Whale;
and yet we know of no method or instrument they have to kill these
Animals.

In the woods are plenty of Excellent Timber, fit for all purposes except
Ships' Masts; and perhaps upon a Close Examination some might be found
not improper for that purpose. There grows spontainously everywhere a
kind of very broad-bladed grass, like flags of the Nature of Hemp,* (*
The New Zealand flax (Phormium Tenax) is now a considerable article of
commerce. It furnishes a very strong fibre, and is made into rope, etc.)
of which might be made the very best of Cordage and Canvas, etc. There
are 2 sorts, one finer than the other; of these the Natives make Cloth,
rope, Lines, netts, etc. Iron Ore is undoubtedly to be found here,
particularly about Mercury Bays, where we found great quantities of Iron
sand; however, we met with no Ore of any Sort, neither did we ever see
any sort of Metal with the Natives. We met with some stones at Admiralty
Bay that appear'd to be Mineral in some degree, but Dr. Solander was of
Opinion that they contain'd no Sort of Metal* (* Gold and coal have been
found in New Zealand in large quantities. Gold at Otago and Hokatika in
the South Island, and at Thames in the North. The coalfields round the
Grey River are enormous, and have no doubt a great future; and this
useful mineral is also found in the Bay of Islands, and other places in
the North Island. Other metals, as copper, silver, antimony, have also
been found and worked.) The white stone we saw near the South Cape and
some other parts to the Southward, which I took to be a kind of Marble,
such as I had seen on one of the Hills I was upon in Mercury Bay, Mr.
Banks--I afterwards found--was of Opinion that they were Mineral to the
highest degree; he is certainly a much better Judge of these things than
I am, and therefore I might be mistaken in my opinion, which was only
founded on what I had before seen not only in this Country, but in other
parts where I have been; and at the same time I must observe we were not
less than 6 or 8 Leagues from the Land, and nearer it was not possible
for us at that time to come without running the Ship into Apparent
Danger. However, I am no Judge how far Mineral can be distinguished as
such; certain it is that in Southern parts of this Country there are
whole Mountains of Nothing Else but stone, some of which, no doubt, may
be found to contain Metal.

Should it ever become an object of settling this Country, the best place
for the first fixing of a Colony would be either in the River Thames or
the Bay of Islands; for at either of these places they would have the
advantage of a good Harbour, and by means of the former an Easy
Communication would be had, and settlements might be extended into the
inland parts of the Country. For a very little trouble and Expence small
Vessels might be built in the River proper for the Navigation thereof. It
is too much for me to assert how little water a Vessel ought to draw to
Navigate this River, even so far up as I was in the Boat; this depends
intirely upon the Depth of Water that is upon the bar or flat that lay
before the narrow part of the River, which I had not an opportunity of
making myself acquainted with, but I am of Opinion that a Vessel that
draws not above 10 or 12 feet may do it with Ease. So far as I have been
able to Judge of the Genius of these people it does not appear to me to
be at all difficult for Strangers to form a settlement in this Country;
they seem to be too much divided among themselves to unite in opposing,
by which means, and kind and Gentle usage, the Colonists would be able to
form strong parties among them.

The Natives of this Country are a Strong, rawboned, well made, Active
People, rather above than under the common size, especially the Men; they
are of a very dark brown colour, with black hair, thin black beards, and
white teeth, and such as do not disfigure their faces by tattowing, etc.,
have in general very good features. The Men generally were their Hair
long, Coomb'd up, and tied upon the Crown of their Heads; some of the
women were it long and loose upon their Shoulders, old women especially;
others again were it crop'd short. Their coombs are made some of bones,
and others of Wood; they sometimes Wear them as an Ornament stuck upright
in their Hair. They seem to enjoy a good state of Health, and many of
them live to a good old Age.* (* The Maoris were remarkable for
longevity, and for health and strength in old age.) Many of the old and
some of the Middle aged Men have their faces mark'd or tattow'd with
black, and some few we have seen who have had their buttocks, thighs, and
other parts of their bodies marked, but this is less common. The figures
they mostly use are spirals, drawn and connected together with great
nicety and judgement. They are so exact in the application of these
Figures that no difference can be found between the one side of the face
and the other, if the whole is marked, for some have only one side, and
some a little on both sides; hardly any but the old Men have the whole
tattow'd. From this I conclude that it takes up some time, perhaps Years,
to finish the Operation, which all Who have begun may not have
perseverance enough to go through, as the manner in which it must be done
must certainly cause intollerable pain, and may be the reason why so few
are Marked at all--at least I know no other. The Women inlay the Colour
of Black under the skins of their lips, and both sexes paint their faces
and bodies at times more or less with red Oker, mixed with fish Oil.

[Clothing of New Zealanders.]

Their common Cloathing are very much like square Thrumb'd Matts, that are
made of rope Yarns, to lay at the doors or passages into houses to clean
ones shoes upon. These they tie round their necks, the Thrumb'd side out,
and are generally large enough to cover the body as low as the knee; they
are made with very little Preparation of the broad Grass plant before
mentioned. Beside the Thrumb'd Matts, as I call them, they have other
much finer cloathing, made of the same plant after it is bleached and
prepared in such a Manner that it is as white and almost as soft as flax,
but much stronger. Of this they make pieces of cloth about 5 feet long
and 4 broad; these are wove some pieces close and others very open; the
former are as stout as the strongest sail cloth, and not unlike it, and
yet it is all work'd or made by hand with no other Instrument than a
Needle or Bodkin. To one end of every piece is generally work'd a very
neat border of different colours of 4 or 6 inches broad, and they very
often Trim them with pieces of Dog Skin or birds' feathers. These pieces
of Cloth they wear as they do the other, tying one End round their Necks
with a piece of string, to one end of which is fixed a Needle or Bodkin
made of Bone, by means of which they can easily fasten, or put the string
through any part of the Cloth; they sometimes wear pieces of this kind of
Cloth round their Middles, as well as over their Shoulders. But this is
not common, especially with the Men, who hardly ever wear anything round
their Middles, observing no sort of Decency in that respect; neither is
it at all uncommon for them to go quite Naked without any one thing about
them besides a belt round their waists, to which is generally fastened a
small string, which they tye round the prepuse; in this manner I have
seen hundreds of them come off to and on board the Ship, but they
generally had their proper Cloathing in the boat along with them to put
on if it rain'd, etc. The Women, on the other hand, always wear something
round their Middle; generally a short, thrumbd Matt, which reaches as low
as their Knees. Sometimes, indeed, I have seen them with only a Bunch of
grass or plants before, tyed on with a piece of fine platting made of
sweet-scented grass; they likewise wear a piece of cloth over their
Shoulders as the Men do; this is generally of the Thrum kind. I hardly
ever saw a Woman wear a piece of fine cloth. One day at Talago I saw a
strong proof that the Women never appear naked, at least before
strangers. Some of us hapned to land upon a small Island where several of
them were Naked in the Water, gathering of Lobsters and shell fish; as
soon as they saw us some of them hid themselves among the Rocks, and the
rest remain'd in the Sea until they had made themselves Aprons of the Sea
Weed; and even then, when they came out to us, they shew'd Manifest signs
of Shame, and those who had no method of hiding their nakedness would by
no means appear before us.

The Women have all very soft Voices, and may by that alone be known from
the Men. The Making of cloth and all other Domestick work is, I believe,
wholy done by them, and the more Labourious work, such as building Boats,
Houses, Tilling the ground, etc., by the Men. Both men and women wear
ornaments at their Ears and about their Necks; these are made of stone,
bone, Shells, etc., and are variously shaped; and some I have seen wear
human Teeth and finger Nails, and I think we were told that they did
belong to their deceased friends. The Men, when they are dressed,
generally wear 2 or 3 long white feathers stuck upright in their Hair,
and at Queen Charlotte's sound many, both men and women, wore Round Caps
made of black feathers.

[War Practices of New Zealanders.]

The old men are much respected by the younger, who seem to be govern'd
and directed by them on most Occasions. We at first thought that they
were united under one head or Chief, whose Name is Teeratu; we first
heard of him in Poverty Bay, and he was own'd as Chief by every one we
met with from Cape Kidnappers to the Northward and Westward as far as the
Bay of Plenty, which is a great extent of territories for an Indian
Prince. When we were upon the East Coast they always pointed inland to
the Westward for the place of his residence, which I believe to be in the
Bay of Plenty, and that those Hippas or fortified Towns are Barrier Towns
either for or against him; but most likely the former, and if so, may be
the utmost Extent of his Dominions to the Westwards, for at Mercury bay
they did not own him as their Prince, nor no where else either to the
Westward or Southward, or any other single person; for at whatever place
we put in at, or whatever people we spoke with upon the Coast, they
generally told us that those that were at a little distance from them
were their Enemies; from which it appear'd to me that they were very much
divided into Parties, which make war one with another, and all their
Actions and behaviour towards us tended to prove that they are a brave,
open, war-like people, and void of Treachery.

Whenever we were Visited by any number of them that had never heard or
seen anything of us before they generally came off in the largest Canoe
they had, some of which will carry 60, 80, or 100 people. They always
brought their best Cloaths along with them, which they put on as soon as
they came near the Ship. In each Canoe were generally an old Man, in some
2 or 3; these used always to direct the others, were better Cloathed, and
generally carried a Halbard or Battle Axe in their hands, or some such
like thing that distinguished them from the others. As soon as they came
within about a Stone's throw of the Ship they would there lay, and call
out, "Haromoi harenta a patoo ago!" that is, "Come here, come ashore with
us, and we will kill you with our patoo patoos!" and at the same time
would shake them at us. At times they would dance the War dance, and
other times they would trade with and talk to us, and Answer such
Questions as were put to them with all the Calmness imaginable, and then
again begin the War Dance, shaking their Paddles, Patoo patoos, etc., and
make strange contortions at the same time. As soon as they had worked
themselves up to a proper pitch they would begin to attack us with Stones
and darts, and oblige us, wether we would or no, to fire upon them.
Musquetry they never regarded unless they felt the Effect; but great Guns
they did, because they threw stones farther than they could Comprehend.
After they found that our Arms were so much superior to theirs, and that
we took no advantage of that superiority, and a little time given them to
reflect upon it, they ever after were our very good friends; and we never
had an instance of their attempting to surprize or cut off any of our
people when they were ashore; opportunity for so doing they must have had
at one time or another.

It is hard to account for what we have every where been told, of their
Eating their Enemies killed in Battle, which they most Certainly do;
Circumstances enough we have seen to Convince us of the Truth of this.
Tupia, who holds this Custom in great aversion, hath very often Argued
with them against it, but they have always as streniously supported it,
and never would own that it was wrong. It is reasonable to suppose that
men with whom this custom is found, seldom, if ever, give Quarter to
those they overcome in battle; and if so, they must fight desperately to
the very last. A strong proof of this supposition we had from the People
of Queen Charlotte's sound, who told us, but a few days before we Arrived
that they had kill'd and Eat a whole boat's crew. Surely a single boat's
crew, or at least a part of them, when they found themselves beset and
overpowered by numbers would have surrender'd themselves prisoners was
such a thing practised among them. The heads of these unfortunate people
they preserved as Trophies; 4 or 5 of them they brought off to shew to
us, one of which Mr. Banks bought, or rather forced them to sell, for
they parted with it with the utmost reluctancy, and afterwards would not
so much as let us see one more for any thing we could offer them.

In the Article of Food these People have no great Variety; Fern roots,
Dogs, Fish, and wild fowl is their Chief diet, for Cocos, Yams, and Sweet
Potatoes is not Cultivated every where. They dress their Victuals in the
same Manner as the people in the South Sea Islands; that is, dogs and
Large fish they bake in a hole in the ground, and small fish, birds, and
Shell fish, etc., they broil on the fire. Fern roots they likewise heat
over the fire, then beat them out flat upon a stone with a wooden Mallet;
after this they are fit for Eating, in the doing of which they suck out
the Moist and Glutinous part, and Spit out the Fibrous parts. These ferns
are much like, if not the same as, the mountain ferns in England.

They catch fish with Seans, Hooks and line, but more commonly with hooped
netts very ingeniously made; in the middle of these they tie the bait,
such as Sea Ears, fish Gutts, etc., then sink the Nett to the bottom with
a stone; after it lays there a little time they haul it Gently up, and
hardly ever without fish, and very often a large quantity. All their
netts are made of the broad Grass plant before mentioned; generally with
no other preparation than by Splitting the blade of the plant into
threads. Their fish hooks are made of Crooked pieces of Wood, bones, and
Shells.

[New Zealand Canoes, Houses, etc.]

The people shew great ingenuity and good workmanship in the building and
framing their boats or Canoes. They are long and Narrow, and shaped very
much like a New England Whale boat. Their large Canoes are, I believe,
built wholy for war, and will carry from 40 to 80 or 100 Men with their
Arms, etc. I shall give the Dimensions of one which I measured that lay
ashore at Tolago. Length 68 1/2 feet, breadth 5 feet, and Depths 3 1/2,
the bottom sharp, inclining to a wedge, and was made of 3 pieces hollow'd
out to about 2 Inches or an Inch and a half thick, and well fastned
together with strong platting. Each side consisted of one Plank only,
which was 63 feet long and 10 or 12 Inches broad, and about 1 1/4 Inch
thick, and these were well fitted and lashed to the bottom part. There
were a number of Thwarts laid a Cross and Lashed to each Gunwale as a
strengthening to the boat. The head Ornament projected 5 or 6 feet
without the body of the Boat, and was 4 feet high; the Stern Ornament was
14 feet high, about 2 feet broad, and about 1 1/2 inch thick; it was
fixed upon the Stern of the Canoe like the Stern post of a Ship upon her
Keel. The Ornaments of both head and Stern and the 2 side boards were of
Carved Work, and, in my opinion, neither ill design'd nor executed. All
their Canoes are built after this plan, and few are less than 20 feet
long. Some of the small ones we have seen with Outriggers, but this is
not Common. In their War Canoes they generally have a quantity of Birds'
feathers hung in Strings, and tied about the Head and stern as Additional
Ornament. They are as various in the heads of their Canoes as we are in
those of our Shipping; but what is most Common is an odd Design'd Figure
of a man, with as ugly a face as can be conceived, a very large Tongue
sticking out of his Mouth, and Large white Eyes made of the Shells of Sea
Ears. Their paddles are small, light, and neatly made; they hardly ever
make use of sails, at least that we saw, and those they have are but ill
contrived, being generally a piece of netting spread between 2 poles,
which serve for both Masts and Yards.

The Houses of these People are better calculated for a Cold than a Hot
Climate; they are built low, and in the form of an oblong square. The
framing is of wood or small sticks, and the sides and Covering of thatch
made of long Grass. The door is generally at one end, and no bigger than
to admit of a man to Creep in and out; just within the door is the fire
place, and over the door, or on one side, is a small hole to let out the
Smoke. These houses are 20 or 30 feet long, others not above half as
long; this depends upon the largeness of the Family they are to contain,
for I believe few familys are without such a House as these, altho' they
do not always live in them, especially in the summer season, when many of
them live dispers'd up and down in little Temporary Hutts, that are not
sufficient to shelter them from the weather.

The Tools which they work with in building their Canoes, Houses, etc.,
are adzes or Axes, some made of a hard black stone, and others of green
Talk. They have Chiszels made of the same, but these are more commonly
made of Human Bones. In working small work and carving I believe they use
mostly peices of Jasper, breaking small pieces from a large Lump they
have for that purpose; as soon as the small peice is blunted they throw
it away and take another. To till or turn up the ground they have wooden
spades (if I may so call them), made like stout pickets, with a piece of
wood tied a Cross near the lower end, to put the foot upon to force them
into the Ground. These Green Talk Axes that are whole and good they set
much Value upon, and never would part with them for anything we could
offer.* (* The weapons of greenstone, found in the South Islands, were
much prized. This hard material required years to shape into a mere, or
short club, and these were handed down from father to son as a most
valuable possession.) I offer'd one day for one, One of the best Axes I
had in the Ship, besides a number of Other things, but nothing would
induce the owner to part with it; from this I infer'd that good ones were
scarce among them.

Diversions and Musical instruments they have but few; the latter Consists
of 2 or 3 sorts of Trumpets and a small Pipe or Whistle, and the former
in singing and Dancing. Their songs are Harmonious enough, but very
doleful to a European ear. In most of their dances they appear like mad
men, Jumping and Stamping with their feet, making strange Contorsions
with every part of the body, and a hideous noise at the same time; and if
they happen to be in their Canoes they flourish with great Agility their
Paddles, Pattoo Pattoos, various ways, in the doing of which, if there
are ever so many boats and People, they all keep time and Motion together
to a surprizing degree. It was in this manner that they work themselves
to a proper Pitch of Courage before they used to attack us; and it was
only from their after behaviour that we could tell whether they were in
jest or in Earnest when they gave these Heivas, as they call them, of
their own accord, especially at our first coming into a place. Their
signs of Friendship is the waving the hand or a piece of Cloth, etc.

We were never able to learn with any degree of certainty in what manner
they bury their dead; we were generally told that they put them in the
ground; if so it must be in some secret or by place, for we never saw the
least signs of a burying place in the whole Country.* (* The burying
places were kept secret. The body was temporarily buried, and after some
time exhumed; the bones were cleaned, and hidden in some cave or cleft in
the rocks. As bones were used by enemies to make implements, it was a
point to keep these depositories secret, to prevent such desecration.)
Their Custom of mourning for a friend or relation is by cutting and
Scarifying their bodys, particularly their Arms and breasts, in such a
manner that the Scars remain indelible, and, I believe, have some
signification such as to shew how near related the deceased was to them.

[Maori and Tahiti Words.]

With respect to religion, I believe these people trouble themselves very
little about it; they, however, believe that there is one Supream God,
whom they call Tawney,* (* Probably Tane-mahuta, the creator of animal
and vegetable life. The Maori does not pray.) and likewise a number of
other inferior deities; but whether or no they worship or Pray to either
one or the other we know not with any degree of certainty. It is
reasonable to suppose that they do, and I believe it; yet I never saw the
least Action or thing among them that tended to prove it. They have the
same Notions of the Creation of the World, Mankind, etc., as the people
of the South Sea Islands have; indeed, many of their notions and Customs
are the very same. But nothing is so great a proof of their all having
had one Source as their Language, which differ but in a very few words
the one from the other, as will appear from the following specimens,
which I had from Mr. Banks, who understands their Language as well, or
better than, any one on board.

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH.
COLUMN 2: NEW ZEALAND.
COLUMN 3: SOUTH SEA ISLANDS.

A Chief : Eareete : Eare.
A Man : Taata : Taata.
A Woman : Ivahina : Ivahine.
The Head : Eupo : Eupo.
The Hair : Macauve : --.
The Ear : Terringa : Terrea.
The Forehead : Erai : Erai.
The Eyes : Matu : Matu.
The Cheek : Paparinga : Paparea.
The Nose : Ahewh : Ahew.
The Mouth : Hangoutou : Outou.
The Chinn : Ecouwai : --.
The Teeth : Hennihu : Nihio.
The Arm : Haringaringu : Rema.
The Finger : Maticara : Maneow.
The Belly : Ateraboo : Oboo.
The Naval : Apeto : Peto.
Come here : Haromai : Haromai.
Fish : Heica : Eyca.
A Lobster : Kooura : Tooura.
Coccos : Taro : Taro.
Sweet Potatoes : Cumala : Cumala.
Yamms : Tuphwhe : Tuphwhe.
Birds : Mannu : Mannu.
The Wind : Mebaw : Mattai.
A Thief : Amootoo : Teto.
To examine : Mataketake : Mataibai.
To sing : Eheiva : Heiva.
Bad : Keno : Eno.
Trees : Oratou : Eraou.
Grand Father : Toubouna : Toubouna.
Friend : -- : Tio.
No : Kaoura : Oure.
Number 1 : Tahai : Tahai.
Number 2 : Rua : Rua.
Number 3 : Torou : Torou.
Number 4 : Ha : Hea.
Number 5 : Rema : Remo.
Number 6 : Ono : Ono.
Number 7 : Etu : Hetu.
Number 8 : Wharou : Wharou.
Number 9 : Iva : Hyva.
Number 10 : Angahourou : Ahourou.
What do you call this or that? : Owy Terra : Owy Terra.

[Speculations on a Southern Continent.]

There are some small differance in the Language spoke by the
Aeheinomoweans and those of Tovy Poenammu; but this differance seem'd to
me to be only in the pronunciation, and is no more than what we find
between one part of England and another. What is here inserted as a
Specimen is that spoke by the People of Aeheinomouwe. What is meant by
the South Sea Islands are those Islands we ourselves Touched at; but I
gave it that title because we have always been told that the same
Language is universally spoke by all the Islanders, and that this is a
Sufficient proof that both they and the New Zelanders have had one Origin
or Source, but where this is even time perhaps may never discover.

It certainly is neither to the Southward nor Eastward, for I cannot
perswaide myself that ever they came from America; and as to a Southern
Continent, I do not believe any such thing exist, unless in a high
Latitude. But as the Contrary opinion hath for many Years prevail'd, and
may yet prevail, it is necessary I should say something in support of
mine more than what will be directly pointed out by the Track of this
Ship in those Seas; for from that alone it will evidently appear that
there is a large space extending quite to the Tropick in which we were
not, or any other before us that we can ever learn for certain. In our
route to the Northward, after doubling Cape Horn, when in the Latitude of
40 degrees, we were in the Longitude of 110 degrees; and in our return to
the Southward, after leaving Ulietea, when in the same Latitude, we were
in the Longitude of 145 degrees; the differance in this Latitude is 35
degrees of Longitude. In the Latitude of 30 degrees the differance of the
2 Tracks is 21 degrees, and that differance continues as low as 20
degrees; but a view of the Chart will best illustrate this.

Here is now room enough for the North Cape of the Southern Continent to
extend to the Northward, even to a pretty low Latitude. But what
foundation have we for such a supposition? None, that I know of, but
this, that it must either be here or no where. Geographers have indeed
laid down part of Quiros' discoveries in this Longitude, and have told us
that he had these signs of a Continent, a part of which they have
Actually laid down in the Maps; but by what Authority I know not. Quiros,
in the Latitude of 25 or 26 degrees South, discover'd 2 Islands, which, I
suppose, may lay between the Longitude of 130 and 140 degrees West.
Dalrymple lays them down in 146 degrees West, and says that Quiros saw to
the Southward very large hanging Clouds and a very thick Horizon, with
other known signs of a Continent. Other accounts of their Voyage says not
a word about this; but supposing this to be true, hanging Clouds and a
thick Horizon are certainly no signs of a Continent--I have had many
proofs to the Contrary in the Course of this Voyage; neither do I believe
that Quiros looked upon such things as known signs of land, for if he had
he certainly would have stood to the Southward, in order to have
satisfied himself before he had gone to the Northward, for no man seems
to have had discoveries more at heart than he had. Besides this, this was
the ultimate object of his Voyage.* (* It is conjectured that what Quiros
saw was Tahiti, but his track on this voyage is very vague. There are
certainly no islands in the latitude given except Pitcairn.) If Quiros
was in the Latitude of 26 degrees and Longitude 146 degrees West, then I
am certain that no part of the Southern Continent can no where extend so
far to the Northward as the above mentioned Latitude. But the Voyage
which seems to thrust it farthest back in the Longitude I am speaking of,
viz., between 130 and 150 degrees West, is that of Admiral Roggeween, a
Dutchman, made in 1722, who, after leaving Juan Fernandes, went in search
of Davis's Island; but not finding it, he ran 12 degrees more to the
West, and in the Latitude of 28 1/2 degrees discover'd Easter Island.
Dalrymple and some others have laid it down in 27 degrees South and 106
degrees 30 minutes West, and supposes it to be the same as Davis's Isle,
which I think cannot be from the Circumstance of the Voyage; on the other
hand Mr. Pingre, in his Treatise concerning the Transit of Venus, gives
an extract of Roggeween's Voyage and a map of the South Seas, wherein he
places Easter Island in the Latitude of 28 1/2 degrees South, and in the
Longitude of 123 degrees West* (* Easter Island is in longitude 110
degrees West, and is considered identical with Davis' Island.) his reason
for so doing may be seen at large in the said Treatise. He likewise lays
down Roggeween's rout through those South Seas very different from any
other Author I have seen; for after leaving Easter Island he makes him to
steer South-West to the height of 34 degrees South, and afterwards
West-North-West. If Roggeween really took this rout, then it is not
probable that there is any Main land to the Northward of 35 degrees
South. However, Mr. Dalrymple and some Geographers have laid down
Roggeween's track very different from Mr. Pingre. From Easter Isle they
have laid down his Track to the North-West, and afterwards very little
different from that of La Maire; and this I think is not probable, that a
man who, at his own request, was sent to discover the Southern Continent
should take the same rout thro' these Seas as others had done before who
had the same thing in View; by so doing he must be Morally certain of not
finding what he was in search of, and of course must fail as they had
done. Be this as it may, it is a point that cannot be clear'd up from the
published accounts of the Voyage, which, so far from taking proper notice
of their Longitude, have not even mentioned the Latitude of several of
the Islands they discover'd, so that I find it impossible to lay down
Roggeween's rout with the least degree of accuracy.* (* Roggeween's track
is still unknown.)

But to return to our own Voyage, which must be allowed to have set aside
the most, if not all, the Arguments and proofs that have been advanced by
different Authors to prove that there must be a Southern Continent; I
mean to the Northward of 40 degrees South, for what may lie to the
Southward of that Latitude I know not. Certain it is that we saw no
Visible signs of Land, according to my Opinion, neither in our rout to
the Northward, Southward, or Westward, until a few days before we made
the Coast of New Zeland. It is true we have often seen large flocks of
Birds, but they were generally such as are always seen at a very great
distance from land; we likewise saw frequently peices of Sea or Rock
Weed, but how is one to know how far this may drive to Sea. I am told,
and that from undoubted Authority, that there is Yearly thrown up upon
the Coast of Ireland and Scotland a sort of Beans called Oxe Eyes, which
are known to grow no where but in the West Indies; and yet these 2 places
are not less than 1200 Leagues asunder. Was such things found floating
upon the Water in the South Seas one would hardly be perswaided that one
was even out of sight of Land, so apt are we to Catch at everything that
may at least point out to us the favourite Object we are in persuit of;
and yet experiance shews that we may be as far from it as ever.

Thus I have given my Opinion freely and without prejudice, not with any
View to discourage any future attempts being made towards discovering the
Southern Continent; on the Contrary, as I think this Voyage will
evidently make it appear that there is left but a small space to the
Northward of 40 degrees where the grand object can lay. I think it would
be a great pity that this thing, which at times has been the Object of
many Ages and Nations, should not now be wholy be clear'd up; which might
very Easily be done in one Voyage without either much trouble or danger
or fear of Miscarrying, as the Navigator would know where to go to look
for it; but if, after all, no Continent was to be found, then he might
turn his thoughts towards the discovery of those Multitude of Islands
which, we are told, lay within the Tropical regions to the South of the
Line, and this we have from very good Authority, as I have before hinted.
This he will always have in his power; for, unless he be directed to
search for the Southern lands in a high Latitude, he will not, as we
were, be obliged to go farther to the Westward in the Latitude of 40
degrees than 140 or 145 degrees West, and therefore will always have it
in his power to go to George's Island, where he will be sure of meeting
with refreshments to recruit his people before he sets out upon the
discovery of the Islands.* (* Cook carried out this programme in his
second voyage, when he set at rest for ever the speculation regarding the
Southern Continent.) But should it be thought proper to send a Ship out
upon this Service while Tupia lives, and he to come out in her, in that
case she would have a prodidgious Advantage over every ship that hath
been upon discoveries in those Seas before; for by means of Tupia,
supposing he did not accompany you himself, you would always get people
to direct you from Island to Island, and would be sure of meeting with a
friendly reception and refreshment at every Island you came to. This
would enable the Navigator to make his discoveries the more perfect and
Compleat; at least it would give him time so to do, for he would not be
Obliged to hurry through those Seas thro' any apprehentions of wanting
Provisions.

[Tupia's List of Islands.]

I shall now add a list of those Islands which Tupia and Several others
have given us an account of, and Endeavour to point out the respective
Situations from Otaheite, or George's Island; but this, with respect to
many of them, cannot be depended upon. Those marked thus (*) Tupia
himself has been at, and we have no reason to doubt his Veracity in this,
by which it will appear that his Geographical knowledge of those Seas is
pretty Extensive; and yet I must observe that before he came with us he
hardly had an Idea of any land being larger than Otaheite.

COLUMN 1: NAME OF THE ISLANDS NORTH-EAST QUARTER.
COLUMN 2: BEARINGS FROM OTAHEITE.

Oopate : Between the North and North-North-East.
Ooura : Between the North and North-North-East.
Teohcoa : Between the North and North-North-East.
Oryvoa : Between the North and North-North-East.
Ohevapato : Between the North and North-North-East.
Otaah : North-North-East to North-East by North.
Ohevaroa : North-North-East to North-East by North.
Temanno : North-North-East to North-East by North.
Ootta : North-North-East to North-East by North.

COLUMN 1: NAME OF THE ISLANDS SOUTH-EAST QUARTER.
COLUMN 2: BEARINGS FROM OTAHEITE.

Moutou : South to South-East.
Toomitoaroaro : South to South-East.
*Tennowhammeatane : South to South-East.
Ohitetamaruire : South to South-East.
Ouropoe : South to South-East.
*Mytea or Oznaburg Island : East-South-East and  East.
Ohevanue : East-South-East and  East.
Ohirotah : East-South-East and  East.

COLUMN 1: NAME OF THE ISLANDS SOUTH-WEST QUARTER.
COLUMN 2: BEARINGS FROM OTAHEITE.

*Imao or York Island : West by South and West-South-West.
*Tapooamanue or Saunders Island : West by South and West-South-West.
*Manua : Between the South and South-West.
*Honue : Between the South and South-West.
*Ohiteroa : Between the South and South-West.
Onawhaa : Between the South and South-West.
Otaohoera : Between the South and South-West.
Opooroo : Between the South and South-West.
Ooonow : Between the South and South-West.
Teorooromatiwhatea : Between the South and South-West.
*Teatowhite : Between the South and South-West.
Oheavie : Between the South-West and West-South-West.
Pooromathetua : Between the South-West and West-South-West.
Teamoorohete : Between the South-West and West-South-West.
Ohetotarive : Between the South-West and West-South-West.
Ohetotareva : Between the South-West and West-South-West.
Ohitetoutoumi : Between the South-West and West-South-West.
*Mooenatayo : West.
Tetupatunaeo : West.
Ohiteteutenatu : West.
Ohitepoto : West.

COLUMN 1: NAME OF THE ISLANDS NORTH-EAST QUARTER.
COLUMN 2: BEARINGS FROM OTAHEITE.

Whareva : North-East.
Whatteruro : North-East.
Tetioo : North-East.
Tetineohva : North-East.
Terouwhah : North-East.
Whaoa : North-North-East.
Whaterretaah : North-North-East.
Whaneanea : North-North-East.
Ohevatoutua : East by North.

COLUMN 1: NAME OF THE ISLANDS NORTH-WEST QUARTER.
COLUMN 2: BEARINGS FROM OTAHEITE.

*Tethuroa : North by West.
Oonnah : North by West.
Obaha : North by West.
Maataah : North by West.
*Huiheine : Between the North and West.
*Ulietea : Between the North and West.
*Otaha : Between the North and West.
*Bolabola : Between the North and West.
*Tubai : Between the North and West.
*Maurua : Between the North and West.
Opoopooa : Between the North and West.
Opopatea : Between the North and West.
*Whennuaouda : Between the North by West and West.
*Motehea : Between the North by West and West.
*Oourio : Between the North by West and West.
*Orurutu : Between the North by West and West.
*Oateea : Between the North by West and West.
Oahooahoo : Between the North by West and West.
Oweha : Between the North by West and West.
Orotuma : Between the North by West and West.
Tenuna : Between the North by West and West.
Orevavie : Between the North by West and West.
Toutepa : Between the North by West and West.
Orarathoa : Between the North by West and West.
Oryvavai : Between the North by West and West.
Oahourou : Between the North by West and West.

The above list* was taken from a Chart of the Islands drawn by Tupia's
own hands. (* This list is hopeless. With the exception of the Society
Group (Huiheine, and the names that follow), Imao (Eimeo), Tapooamanuo,
Tethuroa, and Ohiteroa, all lying near Tahiti, none can be recognised.
Those north and east are no doubt names of the Paumotu Group, low coral
islands, disposed in rings round lagoons, whose innumerable names are
very little known to this day, and very probably the Tahitians had their
own names for them.) He at one time gave us an account of near 130
Islands, but in his Chart he laid down only 74; and this is about the
number that some others of the Natives of Otaheite gave us an account of;
but the account taken by and from different people differ sencibly one
from another both in names and numbers. The first is owing to the want of
rightly knowing how to pronounce the names of the Islands after them; but
be this as it may, it is very certain that there are these number of
Islands, and very Probably a great many more, laying some where in the
Great South Sea, the greatest part of which have never been seen by any
European.

[Historical Notes on New Zealand.]

NOTES ON NEW ZEALAND.

As already stated by Cook in the Journal, New Zealand was first
discovered by Abel Tasman, a Dutch navigator, in the year 1642. Sailing
from Tasmania, he sighted the northern part of the Middle island, and
anchored a little east of Cape Farewell in Massacre (Golden) Bay, so
called by him because the Maoris cut off one of his boats, and killed
three of the crew.

Tasman never landed anywhere, but coasted from Massacre Bay along the
western side of the North Island to the north point. He passed outside
the Three Kings, and thence away into the Pacific, to discover the
Friendly Group.

No European eye again sighted New Zealand until Cook circumnavigated and
mapped the islands.

The warlike character of the natives is well shown in this Journal. On
nearly every occasion they either made, or attempted to make, an attack,
even on the ships, and in self-defence firearms had constantly to be
used. Nevertheless, Cook's judgment enabled him to inaugurate friendly
relations in most places where he stopped long enough to enable the
natives to become acquainted with the strangers.

It was not so with other voyagers. De Surville, a Frenchman, who called
at Doubtless Bay very shortly after Cook left it, destroyed a village,
and carried off a chief. Marion de Fresne was, in 1772, in the Bay of
Islands, killed by the natives, with sixteen of his people, and eaten,
for violation of some of their customs, and illtreatment of some
individuals.

Other outrages followed, committed on both sides, and it is no wonder
that, though Cook represented the advantages of the island for
colonization, it was not considered a desirable place in which to settle.
The cannibalism of the Maoris especially made people shy of the country.

Intermittent communication took place between New Zealand and the new
Colony of New South Wales, and at last, in 1814, Samuel Marsden, a
clergyman of the Church of England, who had seen Maoris in New South
Wales, landed in the Bay of Islands with other missionaries. This
fearless and noble-minded man obtained the confidence of the Maoris, and
a commencement of colonization was made.

It was not, however, until 1840 that the New Zealand Company was formed
to definitely colonize. They made their station at Wellington.

In the same year Captain Hobson, R.N., was sent as Lieutenant-Governor.
Landing first at the Bay of Islands, he transferred his headquarters to
the Hauraki Gulf in September 1840, where he founded Auckland, which
remained the capital until 1876, when the seat of Government was
transferred to Wellington.

The North Island, in which all these occurrences took place, contained by
far the greater number of the natives, and it seems strange now that the
first efforts to settle were not made in the Middle Island, which has
proved equally suitable for Europeans, and where the difficulties of
settlement, from the existence of a less numerous native population, were
not so great. It is not necessary here to follow the complicated history
of New Zealand in later years, which unfortunately comprises several
bloody wars with the Maoris.

The present prosperous condition of this great colony is well known, but
it has not been effected without the rapid diminution of the natives, who
have met with the fate of most aborigines in contact with Europeans,
especially when the former were naturally bold and warlike.

The Maoris have retained the tradition of the original arrival of their
race in a fleet of canoes from a country called Hawaiki, which is by some
supposed to be Hawaii in the Sandwich Group. As we have seen, the
language was practically the same as that of Tahiti, and there is no
doubt that they came from some of the Polynesian islands. The date of the
immigration is supposed to be the fifteenth century.

Each canoe's crew settled in different parts of the North Island, and
were the founders of the different great tribes into which the New
Zealanders were divided. The more celebrated canoes were the Arawa,
Tainui, Aotea, Kuruhaupo, Takitumu, and others.

The Arawa claimed the first landing, and the principal idols came in her.
One of these is now in the possession of Sir George Grey. A large tribe
on the east coast still bears the name of Arawa, and her name, that of
the Tainui, and other of the canoes, are now borne by some of the great
steamships that run to New Zealand.

Cook, in the voyage with which we have to deal, completely examined the
whole group. His pertinacity and determination to follow the whole coast
is a fine instance of his thoroughness in exploration. No weather nor
delay daunted him, and the accuracy with which he depicted the main
features of the outline of the islands is far beyond any of the similar
work of other voyagers. It is true that he missed in the south island
many of the fine harbours that have played such an important part in the
prosperity of the Colony; but when we consider the narrowness of their
entrances, and the enormous extent of the coast line which he laid down
in such a short time, this is not astonishing.

His observations on the natives and on the country display great
acuteness of observation, and had the settlers displayed the same spirit
of fair treatment and respect for the customs of the natives, much of the
bloody warfare that has stained the annals of the Colony might have been
averted; though it is scarcely possible that with such a high-spirited
race the occupation of the islands, especially the North island, where
the majority of the Maoris were, could have taken place without some
disturbances.

New Zealand now contains 630,000 Europeans, and 41,000 Maoris. Its
exports are valued at 10,000,000 pounds, and the imports at 6,250,000
pounds. There are 2000 miles of railways open. Such is the result of
fifty years of colonization in a fertile and rich island, the climate of
which may be described as that of a genial England.


CHAPTER 7. PASSAGE FROM NEW ZEALAND TO NEW HOLLAND.

[April 1770. From New Zealand to Australia.]

SUNDAY, 1st April. In the P.M. had a moderate breeze at East, which in
the Night Veer'd to the North-East, and was attended with hazey, rainy
weather. I have before made mention of our quitting New Zeland with an
intention to steer to the Westward, which we accordingly did, taking our
departure from Cape Farewell in the Latitude of 40 degrees 30 minutes
South and Longitude 185 degrees 58 minutes West from Greenwich, which
bore from us at 5 p.m. West 18 degrees North, distance 12 Miles. After
this we steer'd North-West and West-North-West, in order to give it a
good berth, until 8 o'Clock a.m., at which time we steered West, having
the Advantage of a fresh Gale at North by East. At Noon our Latitude by
account was 40 degrees 12 minutes South, Longitude made from Cape
Farewell 1 degree 11 minutes West.

Monday, 2nd. In the P.M. had a moderate Gale at North, with thick hazey
weather, attended with rain. At 8 it fell little wind, and Veer'd to
West-South-West, at which time we Tack'd. At Midnight the wind came to
South-South-West, and increased to a brisk gale with fair Cloudy weather,
which we made the most of as soon as it was daylight. At Noon our
Latitude, by Observation, was 40 degrees 0 minutes, and Longitude made
from Cape Farewell 2 degrees 31 minutes West.

Tuesday, 3rd. Cloudy weather; Winds at South-West and South-South-West, a
fresh Gale, with which we made our Course good North-West by West, and
distance run from Yesterday at Noon to this day at Noon 38 1/2 Leagues.
Latitude, by observation, 38 degrees 56 minutes South; Longitude made
from Cape Farewell 4 degrees 36 minutes West.

Wednesday, 4th. Had a steady brisk Gale at South-South-West with some
flying showers of rain and large hollow Sea from the Southward. In the
P.M. unbent the Maintopsail to repair, and brought another to the Yard
and set it close reefed. At Noon our Latitude, by Observation, was 37
degrees 56 minutes South; Course and distance since Yesterday at Noon
North 60 degrees West, 122 Miles; Longitude made from Cape Farewell 6
degrees 54 minutes West.

Thursday, 5th. Fresh Gales at South, which in the A.M. veer'd to
South-East by South. At Noon our Latitude, by observation, was 37 degrees
23 minutes South, Longitude made from Cape Farewell 9 degrees 10 minutes
West; Course and distance sail'd since Yesterday at Noon North 73 degrees
15 minutes West, 37 Leagues.

Friday, 6th. Winds between the South by East and South-East, with a
Continued swell from the South-South-West. At Noon our Latitude in per
Observation 37 degrees 18 minutes South; Course and distance sail'd since
Yesterday at Noon North 85 degrees West, 58 Miles. Longitude made from
Cape Farewell 10 degrees 35 minutes West.

Saturday, 7th. Gentle breezes at North-East, which in the A.M. Veer'd to
North-West. In the P.M. found the Variation by the Mean of several
Azimuths to be 13 degrees 50 minutes East, being then in the Latitude of
37 degrees 23 minutes South, and Longitude 196 degrees 44 minutes West.
In the A.M. Punished Jno. Bowles, Marine, with 12 lashes for refusing to
do his duty when order'd by the Boatswain's Mate and Serjeant of Marines.
At Noon Latitude per Observation 37 degrees 35 minutes South, Longitude
made from Cape Farewell 11 degrees 34 minutes West; Course and distance
run since Yesterday noon South 70 degrees 15 minutes West, 50 Miles.

Sunday, 8th. Gentle breezes from the North-West and North. In the P.M.
found the Variation to be 13 degrees 56 minutes East. At Noon Latitude in
per Observation 38 degrees 0 minutes South, Longitude made from Cape
Farewell 13 degrees 2 minutes West; Course and distance sail'd since
Yesterday noon South 70 degrees 15 minutes West, 74 Miles.

Monday, 9th. Gentle breezes at North-West; pleasant weather and a Smooth
Sea. In the A.M. saw a Tropic Bird, which, I believe, is uncommon in such
high Latitudes. At Noon Latitude observ'd 38 degrees 29 minutes South,
Longitude made from Cape Farewell 14 degrees 45 minutes West; Course and
distance sail'd since Yesterday noon South 70 degrees 15 minutes West, 86
Miles.

Tuesday, 10th. Gentle breezes at North-West by North, and clear settled
weather. In the A.M. found the Variation, by the Amplitude, to be 11
degrees 25 minutes East, and by Azimuth 11 degrees 20 minutes. At Noon
the observed Latitude was 38 degrees 51 minutes South, and Longitude made
from Cape Farewell 16 degrees 45 minutes; Longitude in 202 degrees 43
minutes West; Course and distance sail'd since Yesterday noon South 76
degrees 45 minutes West, 96 Miles.

Wednesday, 11th. Gentle breezes from the North-West, and pleasant
weather, with some few showers of rain. In the A.M. found the Variation
to be 13 degrees 48 minutes East, which is 2 1/2 degrees more than it was
yesterday, altho' I should have expected to have found it less, for the
observations were equally good. At Noon Latitude in 39 degrees 7 minutes
South, Longitude made from Cape Farewell 17 degrees 23 minutes; and
Course and distance sail'd since Yesterday noon South 62 degrees West, 34
Miles.

Thursday, 12th. Calm, with now and then light Airs from the North-East
and North-West; cloudy weather, but remarkably warm, and so it hath been
for some days past. At Noon we were in the Latitude of 39 degrees 11
minutes, and Longitude from Cape Farewell 17 degrees 35 minutes West;
Course and distance sail'd since Yesterday noon South 66 degrees West, 10
Miles.

Friday, 13th. Light Airs next to a Calm, with Clear pleasant weather;
what little wind we had was from the North-West quarter. In the Course of
this day found the Variation to be 12 degrees 27 minutes East, being at
Noon, by observation, in the Latitude of 39 degrees 23 minutes South, and
Longitude 204 degrees 2 minutes West; Course and distance since Yesterday
noon South 62 degrees West, 26 Miles, and Longitude made from Cape
Farewell 18 degrees 4 minutes West.

Saturday, 14th. Calm serene weather, with sometimes light Airs from the
Northward. At sun set found the Variation to be 11 degrees 28 minutes
East, and in the Morning to be 11 degrees 30 minutes East. The Spritsail
Topsail being wore to rags, it was condemn'd as not fit for its proper
use, and Converted to repair the 2 Top Gallant Sails, they being of
themselves so bad as not to be worth the Expence of new Canvas, but with
the help of this sail may be made to last some time longer. At Noon
Latitude in 39 degrees 25 minutes South, Longitude made from Cape
Farewell 18 degrees 21 minutes West; Course and distance since Yesterday
noon South 18 degrees West, 13 Miles.

Sunday, 15th. In the P.M. had light Airs at North, which in the A.M.
increased to a fresh Gale, with which we made the best of our way to the
Westward, and by noon had run since yesterday upon a South 86 degrees 15
minutes West Course, 79 Miles. Latitude in, by Observation, 39 degrees 30
minutes South, and Longitude made from Cape Farewell 20 degrees 2 minutes
West. Some flying fish seen this day.

Monday, 16th. Fresh Gales at North-North-West, with Cloudy, hazey
weather. In the P.M. saw an Egg Bird, and yesterday a Gannet was seen;
these are Birds that we reckon never to go far from land. We kept the
lead going all night, but found no soundings with 100 and 130 fathoms
line. At noon we were in the Latitude of 39 degrees 40 minutes South, and
had made 22 degrees 2 minutes of Longitude from Cape Farewell; course and
distance sail'd since Yesterday at Noon South 82 degrees West, 108 Miles.

Tuesday, 17th. At 2 p.m. the wind came to West-South-West, at which time
we Tack'd and stood to the North-West. Before 5 o'Clock we were obliged
to close reef our Topsails, having a Strong gale, with very heavy
squalls; about this time a Small land bird was seen to pearch upon the
rigging. We sounded, but had no ground with 120 fathoms of line. At 8
o'Clock we wore and stood to the Southward until 12 at Night, then wore
and stood to the North-West until 4 a.m., when we again stood to the
Southward, having a fresh Gale at West-South-West, attended with Squalls
and dark hazey unsettled weather until 9; at which time it fell little
wind, and the weather soon after Clear'd up, which, a little after 11,
gave us an Opportunity of taking several observations of the Sun and
Moon, the Mean result of which gave 207 degrees 56 minutes West Longitude
from the Meridian of Greenwich. From these observations the Longitude of
the Ship at Noon was 207 degrees 58 minutes, and by the Log 208 degrees
20 minutes, the difference being only 22 minutes; and this Error may as
well be in the one as the other. Our Latitude at Noon was 39 degrees 36
minutes South, the Longitude made from Cape Farewell 22 degrees 22
minutes West.

Wednesday, 18th. Winds Southerly, a hard gale, with heavy squalls,
attended with Showers of rain and a great Sea from the same Quarter. At 3
p.m. Close reeft the Topsails, handed the Main and Mizen Topsail, and got
down Top Gallant Yards. At 6 the Gale increased to such a height as to
oblige us to take in the Foretopsail and Mainsail, and to run under the
Foresail and Mizen all night; Sounding every 2 hours, but found no ground
with 120 fathoms. At 6 a.m. set the Mainsail, and soon after the
Foretopsail, and before Noon the Maintopsail, both close reeft. At Noon
our Latitude by observation was 38 degrees 45 minutes South, Longitude
from Cape Farewell 23 degrees 43 minutes West; and Course and distance
run since Yesterday noon North 51 degrees West, 82 Miles. Last night we
saw a Port Egmont Hen, and this morning 2 More, a Pintado bird, several
Albetrosses, and black sheer Waters. The first of these birds are Certain
signs of the nearness of land; indeed we cannot be far from it. By our
Longitude we are a degree to the Westward of the East side of Van
Diemen's Land, according to Tasman, the first discoverer's, Longitude of
it, who could not err much in so short a run as from this land to New
Zeland; and by our Latitude we could not be above 50 or 55 Leagues to the
Northward of the place where he took his departure from.


CHAPTER 8. EXPLORATION OF EAST COAST OF AUSTRALIA.

[April 1770.]

THURSDAY, 19th. In the P.M. had fresh Gales at South-South-West and
Cloudy Squally weather, with a large Southerly Sea; at 6 took in the
Topsails, and at 1 A.M. brought too and Sounded, but had no ground with
130 fathoms of line. At 5, set the Topsails close reef'd, and 6, saw
land* (* The south-east coast of Australia. See chart.) extending from
North-East to West, distance 5 or 6 Leagues, having 80 fathoms, fine
sandy bottom. We continued standing to the Westward with the Wind at
South-South-West until 8, at which time we got Topgallant Yards a Cross,
made all sail, and bore away along shore North-East for the Eastermost
land we had in sight, being at this time in the Latitude of 37 degrees 58
minutes South, and Longitude of 210 degrees 39 minutes West. The
Southermost point of land we had in sight, which bore from us West 1/4
South, I judged to lay in the Latitude of 38 degrees 0 minutes South and
in the Longitude of 211 degrees 7 minutes West from the Meridian of
Greenwich. I have named it Point Hicks, because Lieutenant Hicks was the
first who discover'd this Land. To the Southward of this point we could
see no land, and yet it was clear in that Quarter, and by our Longitude
compared with that of Tasman's, the body of Van Diemen's land ought to
have bore due South from us, and from the soon falling of the Sea after
the wind abated I had reason to think it did; but as we did not see it,
and finding the Coast to trend North-East and South-West, or rather more
to the Westward, makes me Doubtfull whether they are one land or no.* (*
Had not the gale on the day before forced Cook to run to the northward,
he would have made the north end of the Furneaux Group, and probably have
discovered Bass Strait, which would have cleared up the doubt, which he
evidently felt, as to whether Tasmania was an island or not. The fact was
not positively known until Dr. Bass sailed through the Strait in a
whale-boat in 1797. Point Hicks was merely a rise in the coast-line,
where it dipped below the horizon to the westward, and the name of Point
Hicks Hill is now borne by an elevation that seems to agree with the
position.) However, every one who compares this Journal with that of
Tasman's will be as good a judge as I am; but it is necessary to observe
that I do not take the Situation of Vandiemen's from the Printed Charts,
but from the extract of Tasman's Journal, published by Dirk Rembrantse.
At Noon we were in the Latitude of 37 degrees 50 minutes and Longitude of
210 degrees 29 minutes West. The extreams of the Land extending from
North-West to East-North-East, a remarkable point, bore North 20 degrees
East, distant 4 Leagues. This point rises to a round hillock very much
like the Ramhead going into Plymouth sound, on which account I called it
by the same name; Latitude 37 degrees 39 minutes, Longitude 210 degrees
22 minutes West. The Variation by an Azimuth taken this morning was 8
degrees 7 minutes East. What we have as yet seen of this land appears
rather low, and not very hilly, the face of the Country green and Woody,
but the Sea shore is all a white Sand.

Friday, 20th. In the P.M. and most part of the night had a fresh Gale
Westerly, with Squalls, attended with Showers of rain. In the A.M. had
the Wind at South-West, with Severe weather. At 1 p.m. saw 3 Water Spouts
at once; 2 were between us and the Shore, and one at some distance upon
our Larboard Quarter. At 6, shortned sail, and brought too for the Night,
having 56 fathoms fine sandy bottom. The Northermost land in sight bore
North by East 1/2 East, and a small Island* (* Gabo Island.) lying close
to a point on the Main bore West, distant 2 Leagues. This point I have
named Cape Howe* (* Cape Howe, called after Admiral Earl Howe, is the
south-east point of Australia. The position is almost exact.); it may be
known by the Trending of the Coast, which is North on the one Side and
South-West on the other. Latitude 37 degrees 28 minutes South; Longitude
210 degrees 3 minutes West. It may likewise be known by some round hills
upon the main just within it. Having brought too with her head off Shore,
we at 10 wore, and lay her head in until 4 a.m., at which time we made
sail along shore to the Northward. At 6, the Northermost land in sight
bore North, being at this time about 4 Leagues from the Land. At Noon we
were in the Latitude of 36 degrees 51 minutes South and Longitude of 209
degrees 53 minutes West, and 3 Leagues from the land. Course sail'd along
shore since Yesterday at Noon was first North 52 degrees East, 30 miles,
then North by East and North by West, 41 Miles. The weather being clear
gave us an opportunity to View the Country, which had a very agreeable
and promising aspect, diversified with hills, ridges, plains, and
Valleys, with some few small lawns; but for the most part the whole was
covered with wood, the hills and ridges rise with a gentle slope; they
are not high, neither are there many of them.

[Off Cape Dromedary, New South Wales.]

Saturday, 21st. Winds Southerly, a Gentle breeze, and Clear weather, with
which we coasted along shore to the Northward. In the P.M. we saw the
smoke of fire in several places; a Certain sign that the Country is
inhabited. At 6, being about 2 or 3 Leagues from the land, we shortned
Sail, and Sounded and found 44 fathoms, a sandy bottom. Stood on under an
easey sail until 12 o'Clock, at which time we brought too until 4 A.M.,
when we made sail, having then 90 fathoms, 5 Leagues from the land. At 6,
we were abreast of a pretty high Mountain laying near the Shore, which,
on account of its figure, I named Mount Dromedary (Latitude 36 degrees 18
minutes South, Longitude 209 degrees 55 minutes West). The shore under
the foot of the Mountain forms a point, which I have named Cape
Dromedary, over which is a peaked hillock. At this time found the
Variation to be 10 degrees 42 minutes East. Between 10 and 11 o'Clock Mr.
Green and I took several Observations of the Sun and Moon, the mean
result of which gave 209 degrees 17 minutes West Longitude from the
Meridian of Greenwich. By observation made yesterday we were in the
Longitude 210 degrees 9 minutes. West 20 minutes gives 209 degrees 49
minutes the Longitude of the Ship to-day at noon per yesterday's
observation, the Mean of which and to-day's give 209 degrees 33 minutes
West, by which I fix the Longitude of this Coast. Our Latitude at Noon
was 35 degrees 49 minutes South; Cape Dromedary bore South 30 degrees
West, distant 12 Leagues. An Open Bay* (* Bateman Bay.) wherein lay 3 or
4 Small Islands, bore North-West by West, distant 5 or 6 Leagues. This
Bay seem'd to be but very little Shelter'd from the Sea Winds, and yet it
is the only likely Anchoring place I have yet seen upon the Coast.

Sunday, 22nd. In the P.M. had a Gentle breeze at South by West with which
we steer'd along shore North by East and North-North-East at the distance
of about 3 Leagues. Saw the smoke of fire in several places near the Sea
beach. At 5, we were abreast of a point of land which, on account of its
perpendicular Clifts, I call'd Point Upright; Latitude 35 degrees 35
minutes South; it bore from us due West, distant 2 Leagues, and in this
Situation had 31 fathoms, Sandy bottom. At 6, falling little wind, we
hauld off East-North-East; at this time the Northermost land in sight
bore North by East 1/2 East, and at midnight, being in 70 fathoms, we
brought too until 4 A.M., at which time we made sail in for the land, and
at daylight found ourselves nearly in the same Place we were at 5 o'Clock
in the evening, by which it was apparent that we had been drove about 3
Leagues to the Southward by a Tide or Current in the night. After this we
steer'd along shore North-North-East, having a Gentle breeze at
South-West, and were so near the Shore as to distinguish several people
upon the Sea beach. They appeared to be of a very dark or black Colour;
but whether this was the real Colour of their skins or the Cloathes they
might have on I know not. At Noon we were by Observation in the Latitude
of 35 degrees 27 minutes and Longitude 209 degrees 23 minutes; Cape
Dromedary bore South 28 degrees West, distance 15 Leagues. A remarkable
peak'd hill laying inland, the Top of which looked like a Pigeon house,
and occasioned my giving it that name, bore North 32 degrees 33 minutes
West, and a small low Island, laying close under the Shore, bore
North-West, distance 2 or 3 Leagues; Variation of the Compass 9 degrees
50 minutes East. When we first discover'd this Island in the morning I
was in hopes, from its appearance, that we should have found Shelter for
the Ship behind it; but when we came to approach it near I did not think
that there was even security for a Boat to land. But this, I believe, I
should have attempted had not the wind come on Shore, after which I did
not think it safe to send a Boat from the Ship, as we had a large hollow
Sea from the South-East rowling in upon the land, which beat every where
very high upon the Shore; and this we have had ever since we came upon
the Coast. The land near the Sea coast still continues of a moderate
height, forming alternately rocky points and Sandy beaches; but inland,
between Mount Dromedary and the Pigeon house, are several pretty high
Mountains, 2 only of which we saw but what were covered with Trees, and
these lay inland behind the Pigeon House, and are remarkably flat a Top,
with Steep rocky clifts all round them. As far as we could see the Trees
in this Country hath all the appearance of being stout and lofty. For
these 2 days past the observed Latitude hath been 12 or 14 Miles to the
Southward of the Ship's account given by the Log, which can be owing to
nothing but a Current set to the Southward.

Monday, 23rd. In the P.M. had a Gentle breeze at East, which in the night
veer'd to North-East and North. At 1/2 past 4 P.M., being about 5 Miles
from the Land, we Tack'd and stood off South-East and East until 4 A.M.,
at which time we Tack'd and stood in, being then about 9 or 10 Leagues
from the land. At 8, it fell little wind, and soon after Calm. At Noon we
were by Observation in the Latitude of 35 degrees 38 minutes and about 6
Leagues from the land, Mount Dromedary bearing South 37 degrees West,
distant 17 Leagues, and the Pidgeon house North 40 degrees West; in this
situation had 74 fathoms.

Tuesday, 24th. In the P.M. had Variable light Airs and Calms until 6
o'Clock, at which time a breeze sprung up at North by West; at this time
we had 70 fathoms Water, being about 4 or 5 Leagues from the land, the
Pidgeon house bearing North 40 degrees West, Mount Dromedary South 30
degrees West, and the Northermost land in sight North 19 degrees East.
Stood to the North-East until Noon, having a Gentle breeze at North-West,
at which time we Tack'd and stood to the Westward, being then, by
observation, in the Latitude of 35 degrees 10 minutes South and Longitude
208 degrees 51 minutes West. A point of land which I named Cape St.
George, we having discovered it on that Saint's day, bore West, distant
19 Miles, and the Pidgeon house South 7 degrees West, the Latitude and
Longitude of which I found to be 35 degrees 19 minutes South and 209
degrees 42 minutes West. In the morning we found the Variation to be, by
the Amplitude, 7 degrees 50 minutes East, by several Azimuths 7 degrees
54 minutes East.

[Off Jervis Bay, New South Wales.]

Wednesday, 25th. In the P.M. had a fresh breeze at North-West until 3
o'Clock, at which time it came to West, and we Tack'd and stood to the
Northward. At 5 o'Clock, being about 5 or 6 Leagues from the land, the
Pidgeon house bearing West-South-West, distant 9 Leagues, sounded and had
86 fathoms. At 8, being very squally, with lightning, we close reef'd the
Topsails and brought too, being then in 120 fathoms. At 3 A.M. made sail
again to the Northward, having the advantage of a fresh Gale at
South-West. At Noon we were about 3 or 4 Leagues from the land and in the
Latitude of 34 degrees 22 minutes and Longitude 208 degrees 36 minutes
West. Course and distance sail'd since Yesterday noon is North by East 49
Miles. In the Course of this day's run we saw the Smoke of fire in
several places near the Sea beach. About 2 Leagues to the Northward of
Cape St. George the Shore seems to form a bay,* (* Jervis Bay, a very
fine port, but little use has been made of it up to the present time.)
which appear'd to be shelter'd from the North-East winds; but as we had
the wind it was not in my power to look into it, and the appearance was
not favourable enough to induce me to loose time in beating up to it. The
North point of this bay, on account of its Figure, I nam'd Long Nose.
Latitude 45 degrees 4 minutes South, 8 Leagues to the Northward of this,
is a point which I call'd Red Point; some part of the Land about it
appeared of that Colour (Latitude 34 degrees 29 minutes South, Longitude
208 degrees 49 minutes West). A little way inland to the North-West of
this point is a round hill, the top of which look'd like the Crown of a
Hatt.

Thursday, 26th. Clear, serene weather. In the P.M. had a light breeze at
North-North-West until 5, at which time it fell Calm, we being then about
3 or 4 Leagues from the land and in 48 fathoms. Variation by Azimuth 8
degrees 48 minutes East, the extreams of the land from North-East by
North to South-West by South. Saw several smokes along shore before dark,
and 2 or 3 times a fire. In the Night we lay becalm'd, driving in before
the Sea, until one o'Clock A.M., at which time we got a breeze from the
land, with which we steer'd North-East, being then in 38 fathoms water.
At Noon it fell little Wind, and veer'd to North-East by North, we being
then in the Latitude of 34 degrees 10 minutes and Longitude 208 degrees
27 minutes West, and about 5 Leagues from the land, which extended from
South 37 degrees West to North 1/2 East. In this Latitude are some White
Clifts, which rise perpendicular from the Sea to a moderate height.

Friday, 27th. Var'ble light Airs between the North-East and North-West,
clear pleasant weather. In the P.M. stood off Shore until 2, then Tackt
and Stood in till 6, at which time we tack'd and stood off, being then in
54 fathoms and about 4 or 5 miles from the land, the Extreams of which
bore from South, 28 degrees West to North 25 degrees 30 minutes East. At
12 we tack'd and stood in until 4 A.M., then made a Trip off until day
light, after which we stood in for the land; in all this time we lost
ground, owing a good deal to the Variableness of the winds, for at Noon
we were by Observation in the Latitude of 34 degrees 21 minutes South,
Red Point bearing South 27 degrees West, distant 3 Leagues. In this
Situation we were about 4 or 5 Miles from the land, which extended from
South 19 degrees 30 minutes West to North 29 degrees East.

Saturday, 28th. In the P.M. hoisted out the Pinnace and Yawl in order to
attempt a landing, but the Pinnace took in the Water so fast that she was
obliged to be hoisted in again to stop her leakes. At this time we saw
several people a shore, 4 of whom where carrying a small Boat or Canoe,
which we imagin'd they were going to put in to the Water in order to Come
off to us; but in this we were mistaken. Being now not above 2 Miles from
the Shore Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, Tupia, and myself put off in the Yawl,
and pull'd in for the land to a place where we saw 4 or 5 of the Natives,
who took to the Woods as we approached the Shore; which disappointed us
in the expectation we had of getting a near View of them, if not to speak
to them. But our disappointment was heightened when we found that we no
where could effect a landing by reason of the great Surf which beat
everywhere upon the shore. We saw haul'd up upon the beach 3 or 4 small
Canoes, which to us appeared not much unlike the Small ones of New
Zeland. In the wood were several Trees of the Palm kind, and no under
wood; and this was all we were able to observe from the boat, after which
we return'd to the Ship about 5 in the evening.* (* The place where Cook
attempted to land is near Bulli, a place where there is now considerable
export of coal. A large coal port, Wollongong, lies a little to the
southward.) At this time it fell Calm, and we were not above a Mile and a
half from the Shore, in 11 fathoms, and within some breakers that lay to
the Southward of us; but luckily a light breeze came off from the Land,
which carried us out of danger, and with which we stood to the Northward.
At daylight in the morning we discover'd a Bay,* (* Botany Bay.) which
appeared to be tollerably well shelter'd from all winds, into which I
resolved to go with the Ship, and with this View sent the Master in the
Pinnace to sound the Entrance, while we keept turning up with the Ship,
having the wind right out. At noon the Entrance bore North-North-West,
distance 1 Mile.

[At Anchor, Botany Bay, New South Wales.]

Sunday, 29th. In the P.M. wind Southerly and Clear weather, with which we
stood into the bay and Anchored under the South shore about 2 miles
within the Entrance in 5 fathoms, the South point bearing South-East and
the North point East. Saw, as we came in, on both points of the bay,
several of the Natives and a few hutts; Men, Women, and Children on the
South Shore abreast of the Ship, to which place I went in the Boats in
hopes of speaking with them, accompanied by Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, and
Tupia. As we approached the Shore they all made off, except 2 Men, who
seem'd resolved to oppose our landing. As soon as I saw this I order'd
the boats to lay upon their Oars, in order to speak to them; but this was
to little purpose, for neither us nor Tupia could understand one word
they said. We then threw them some nails, beads, etc., a shore, which
they took up, and seem'd not ill pleased with, in so much that I thought
that they beckon'd to us to come ashore; but in this we were mistaken,
for as soon as we put the boat in they again came to oppose us, upon
which I fir'd a musquet between the 2, which had no other Effect than to
make them retire back, where bundles of their darts lay, and one of them
took up a stone and threw at us, which caused my firing a Second Musquet,
load with small Shott; and altho' some of the shott struck the man, yet
it had no other effect than making him lay hold on a Target. Immediately
after this we landed, which we had no sooner done than they throw'd 2
darts at us; this obliged me to fire a third shott, soon after which they
both made off, but not in such haste but what we might have taken one;
but Mr. Banks being of Opinion that the darts were poisoned, made me
cautious how I advanced into the Woods. We found here a few small hutts
made of the Bark of Trees, in one of which were 4 or 5 Small Children,
with whom we left some strings of beads, etc. A quantity of Darts lay
about the Hutts; these we took away with us. 3 Canoes lay upon the beach,
the worst I think I ever saw; they were about 12 or 14 feet long, made of
one piece of the Bark of a Tree, drawn or tied up at each end, and the
middle keept open by means of pieces of Stick by way of Thwarts. After
searching for fresh water without success, except a little in a Small
hole dug in the Sand, we embarqued, and went over to the North point of
the bay, where in coming in we saw several people; but when we landed now
there were nobody to be seen. We found here some fresh Water, which came
trinkling down and stood in pools among the rocks; but as this was
troublesome to come at I sent a party of men ashore in the morning to the
place where we first landed to dig holes in the sand, by which means and
a Small stream they found fresh Water sufficient to Water the Ship. The
String of Beads, etc., we had left with the Children last night were
found laying in the Hutts this morning; probably the Natives were afraid
to take them away. After breakfast we sent some Empty Casks a shore and a
party of Men to cut wood, and I went myself in the Pinnace to sound and
explore the Bay, in the doing of which I saw some of the Natives; but
they all fled at my Approach. I landed in 2 places, one of which the
people had but just left, as there were small fires and fresh Muscles
broiling upon them; here likewise lay Vast heaps of the largest Oyster
Shells I ever saw.

Monday, 30th. As Soon as the Wooders and Waterers were come on board to
Dinner 10 or 12 of the Natives came to the watering place, and took away
their Canoes that lay there, but did not offer to touch any one of our
Casks that had been left ashore; and in the afternoon 16 or 18 of them
came boldly up to within 100 yards of our people at the watering place,
and there made a stand. Mr. Hicks, who was the Officer ashore, did all in
his power to intice them to him by offering them presents; but it was to
no purpose, all they seem'd to want was for us to be gone. After staying
a Short time they went away. They were all Arm'd with Darts and wooden
Swords; the darts have each 4 prongs, and pointed with fish bones. Those
we have seen seem to be intended more for striking fish than offensive
Weapons; neither are they poisoned, as we at first thought. After I had
return'd from sounding the Bay I went over to a Cove on the North side of
the Bay, where, in 3 or 4 Hauls with the Sean, we caught about 300 pounds
weight of Fish, which I caused to be equally divided among the Ship's
Company. In the A.M. I went in the Pinnace to sound and explore the North
side of the bay, where I neither met with inhabitants or anything
remarkable. Mr. Green took the Sun's Meridian Altitude a little within
the South Entrance of the Bay, which gave the Latitude 34 degrees 0
minutes South.

[May 1770.]

Tuesday, May 1st. Gentle breezes, Northerly. In the P.M. 10 of the
Natives again visited the Watering place. I, being on board at this time,
went immediately ashore, but before I got there they were going away. I
follow'd them alone and unarm'd some distance along shore, but they would
not stop until they got farther off than I choose to trust myself. These
were armed in the same manner as those that came Yesterday. In the
evening I sent some hands to haul the Saine, but they caught but a very
few fish. A little after sunrise I found the Variation to be 11 degrees 3
minutes East. Last night Forby Sutherland, Seaman, departed this Life,
and in the A.M. his body Was buried ashore at the watering place, which
occasioned my calling the south point of this bay after his name. This
morning a party of us went ashore to some Hutts, not far from the
Watering place, where some of the Natives are daily seen; here we left
several articles, such as Cloth, Looking Glasses, Coombs, Beads, Nails,
etc.; after this we made an Excursion into the Country, which we found
diversified with Woods, Lawns, and Marshes. The woods are free from
underwood of every kind, and the trees are at such a distance from one
another that the whole Country, or at least great part of it, might be
Cultivated without being obliged to cut down a single tree. We found the
Soil every where, except in the Marshes, to be a light white sand, and
produceth a quantity of good Grass, which grows in little Tufts about as
big as one can hold in one's hand, and pretty close to one another; in
this manner the Surface of the Ground is Coated. In the woods between the
Trees Dr. Solander had a bare sight of a Small Animal something like a
Rabbit, and we found the Dung of an Animal* (* This was the kangaroo.)
which must feed upon Grass, and which, we judge, could not be less than a
Deer; we also saw the Track of a Dog, or some such like Animal. We met
with some Hutts and places where the Natives had been, and at our first
setting out one of them was seen; the others, I suppose, had fled upon
our Approach. I saw some Trees that had been cut down by the Natives with
some sort of a Blunt instrument, and several Trees that were barqued, the
bark of which had been cut by the same instrument; in many of the Trees,
especially the Palms, were cut steps of about 3 or 4 feet asunder for the
conveniency of Climbing them. We found 2 Sorts of Gum, one sort of which
is like Gum Dragon, and is the same, I suppose, Tasman took for Gum lac;
it is extracted from the largest tree in the Woods.

Wednesday, 2nd. Between 3 and 4 in the P.M. we return'd out of the
Country, and after Dinner went ashore to the watering place, where we had
not been long before 17 or 18 of the Natives appeared in sight. In the
morning I had sent Mr. Gore, with a boat, up to the head of the Bay to
drudge for Oysters; in his return to the Ship he and another person came
by land, and met with these people, who followed him at the Distance of
10 or 20 Yards. Whenever Mr. Gore made a stand and faced them they stood
also, and notwithstanding they were all Arm'd, they never offer'd to
Attack him; but after he had parted from them, and they were met by Dr.
Monkhouse and one or 2 more, who, upon making a Sham retreat, they
throw'd 3 darts after them, after which they began to retire. Dr.
Solander, I, and Tupia made all the haste we could after them, but could
not, either by words or Actions, prevail upon them to come near us, Mr.
Gore saw some up the Bay, who by signs invited him ashore, which he
prudently declined. In the A.M. had the wind in the South-East with rain,
which prevented me from making an Excursion up the head of the bay as I
intended.

Thursday, 3rd. Winds at South-East, a Gentle breeze and fair weather. In
the P.M. I made a little excursion along the Sea Coast to the Southward,
accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander. At our first entering the
woods we saw 3 of the Natives, who made off as soon as they saw us; more
of them were seen by others of our people, who likewise made off as soon
as they found they were discover'd. In the A.M. I went in the Pinnace to
the head of the bay, accompanied by Drs. Solander and Monkhouse, in order
to Examine the Country, and to try to form some Connections with the
Natives. In our way thither we met with 10 or 12 of them fishing, each in
a Small Canoe, who retir'd into Shoald water upon our approach. Others
again we saw at the first place we landed at, who took to their Canoes,
and fled before we came near them; after this we took Water, and went
almost to the head of the inlet, were we landed and Travel'd some
distance in land. We found the face of the Country much the same as I
have before described, but the land much richer for instead of sand I
found in many places a deep black soil, which we thought was Capable of
producing any kind of grain. At present it produceth, besides Timber, as
fine Meadow as ever was seen; however, we found it not all like this,
some few places were very rocky, but this, I believe, to be uncommon. The
stone is sandy, and very proper for building, etc. After we had
sufficiently examin'd this part we return'd to the Boat, and seeing some
Smoke and Canoes at another part we went thither, in hopes of meeting
with the people, but they made off as we approached. There were 6 Canoes
and 6 small fires near the Shore, and Muscles roasting upon them, and a
few Oysters laying near; from this we conjectured that there had been
just 6 people, who had been out each in his Canoe picking up the Shell
fish, and come a Shore to eat them, where each had made his fire to dress
them by. We tasted of their Cheer, and left them in return Strings of
beads, etc. The day being now far spent, we set out on our return to the
Ship.

Friday, 4th. Winds northerly, serene weather. Upon my return to the Ship
in the evening I found that none of the Natives had Appear'd near the
Watering place, but about 20 of them had been fishing in their Canoes at
no great distance from us. In the A.M., as the Wind would not permit us
to sail, I sent out some parties into the Country to try to form some
Connections with the Natives. One of the Midshipmen met with a very old
man and Woman and 2 Small Children; they were Close to the Water side,
where several more were in their Canoes gathering of Shell fish, and he,
being alone, was afraid to make any stay with the 2 old People least he
should be discovr'd by those in the Canoes. He gave them a bird he had
Shott, which they would not Touch; neither did they speak one word, but
seem'd to be much frightned. They were quite Naked; even the Woman had
nothing to cover her nudities. Dr. Monkhouse and another Man being in the
Woods, not far from the watering place, discover'd 6 more of the Natives,
who at first seem'd to wait his coming; but as he was going up to them he
had a dart thrown at him out of a Tree, which narrowly escaped him. As
soon as the fellow had thrown the dart he descended the Tree and made
off, and with him all the rest, and these were all that were met with in
the Course of this day.

Saturday, 5th. In the P.M. I went with a party of Men over to the North
Shore, and while some hands were hauling the Sean, a party of us made an
Excursion of 3 or 4 Miles into the Country, or rather along the Sea
Coast. We met with nothing remarkable; great part of the Country for some
distance inland from the Sea Coast is mostly a barren heath, diversified
with Marshes and Morasses. Upon our return to the Boat we found they had
caught a great number of small fish, which the sailors call leather
Jackets on account of their having a very thick skin; they are known in
the West Indies. I had sent the Yawl in the morning to fish for Sting
rays, who returned in the Evening with upwards of four hundred weight;
one single one weigh'd 240 pounds Exclusive of the entrails. In the A.M.,
as the wind Continued Northerly, I sent the Yawl again a fishing, and I
went with a party of Men into the Country, but met with nothing
extraordinary.

[Description of Botany Bay, New South Wales.]

Sunday, 6th. In the evening the Yawl return'd from fishing, having Caught
2 Sting rays weighing near 600 pounds. The great quantity of plants Mr.
Banks and Dr. Solander found in this place occasioned my giving it the
Name of Botany Bay.* (* The Bay was at first called Stingray Bay. The
plan of it at the Admiralty is called by this name, and none of the logs
know Botany Bay. It seems probable that Cook finally settled on the name
after the ship left, and when Banks had had time to examine his
collections. A monument was erected in 1870 near the spot, on the
southern side, where Cook first landed. Botany Bay was intended to be the
site where the first settlement of convicts should be made, but on the
arrival of Captain Phillip, on January 18th, 1788, he found it so
unsuited for the number of his colony that he started in a boat to
examine Broken Bay. On his way he went into Port Jackson, and immediately
decided on settling there. On the 25th and 26th the ships went round, and
Sydney was founded.) It is situated in the Latitude of 34 degrees 0
minutes South, Longitude 208 degrees 37 minutes West. It is capacious,
safe, and Commodious; it may be known by the land on the Sea Coast, which
is of a pretty even and moderate height, Rather higher than it is inland,
with steep rocky Clifts next the Sea, and looks like a long Island lying
close under the Shore. The Entrance of the Bay lies about the Middle of
this land. In coming from the Southward it is discover'd before you are
abreast of it, which you cannot do in coming from the Northward; the
entrance is little more than a Quarter of a Mile broad, and lies in
West-North-West. To sail into it keep the South shore on board until
within a small bare Island, which lies close under the North Shore. Being
within that Island the deepest of Water is on that side, 7, 6 and 5
fathoms a good way up; there is Shoald Water a good way off from the
South Shore--from the inner South Point quite to the head of the harbour;
but over towards the North and North-West Shore is a Channell of 12 or 14
feet at low Water, 3 or 4 Leagues up, to a place where there is 3 or 4
fathoms; but there I found very little fresh Water. We Anchor'd near the
South Shore about a Mile within the Entrance for the Conveniency of
Sailing with a Southerly wind and the getting of Fresh Water; but I
afterwards found a very fine stream of fresh Water on the North shore in
the first sandy Cove within the Island, before which the Ship might lay
almost land locked, and wood for fuel may be got everywhere. Although
wood is here in great plenty, yet there is very little Variety; the
bigest trees are as large or larger than our Oaks in England, and grows a
good deal like them, and Yields a reddish Gum; the wood itself is heavy,
hard, and black like Lignum Vitae. Another sort that grows tall and
Strait something like Pines--the wood of this is hard and Ponderous, and
something of the Nature of America live Oak. These 2 are all the Timber
trees I met with; there are a few sorts of Shrubs and several Palm Trees
and Mangroves about the Head of the Harbour. The Country is woody, low,
and flat as far in as we could see, and I believe that the Soil is in
general sandy. In the Wood are a variety of very beautiful birds, such as
Cocatoos, Lorryquets, Parrots, etc., and crows Exactly like those we have
in England. Water fowl is no less plenty about the head of the Harbour,
where there is large flats of sand and Mud, on which they seek their
food; the most of these were unknown to us, one sort especially, which
was black and white, and as large as a Goose, but most like a Pelican.*
(* Most probably the Black and White or Semipalmated Goose, now
exterminated in these parts.) On the sand and Mud banks are Oysters,
Muscles, Cockles, etc., which I believe are the Chief support of the
inhabitants, who go into Shoald Water with their little Canoes and peck
them out of the sand and Mud with their hands, and sometimes roast and
Eat them in the Canoe, having often a fire for that purpose, as I
suppose, for I know no other it can be for. The Natives do not appear to
be numerous, neither do they seem to live in large bodies, but dispers'd
in small parties along by the Water side. Those I saw were about as tall
as Europeans, of a very dark brown Colour, but not black, nor had they
woolly, frizled hair, but black and lank like ours. No sort of Cloathing
or Ornaments were ever seen by any of us upon any one of them, or in or
about any of their Hutts; from which I conclude that they never wear any.
Some that we saw had their faces and bodies painted with a sort of White
Paint or Pigment. Altho' I have said that shell fish is their Chief
support, yet they catch other sorts of fish, some of which we found
roasting on the fire the first time we landed; some of these they strike
with Gigs,* (* A fishing implement like a trident.) and others they catch
with hook and line; we have seen them strike fish with gigs, and hooks
and lines are found in their Hutts. Sting rays, I believe, they do not
eat, because I never saw the least remains of one near any of their Hutts
or fire places. However, we could know but very little of their Customs,
as we never were able to form any Connections with them; they had not so
much as touch'd the things we had left in their Hutts on purpose for them
to take away. During our stay in this Harbour I caused the English
Colours to be display'd ashore every day, and an inscription to be cut
out upon one of the Trees near the Watering place, setting forth the
Ship's Name, Date, etc. [Off Port Jackson, New South Wales.]Having seen
everything this place afforded, we, at daylight in the morning, weigh'd
with a light breeze at North-West, and put to Sea, and the wind soon
after coming to the Southward we steer'd along shore North-North-East,
and at Noon we were by observation in the Latitude of 33 degrees 50
minutes South, about 2 or 3 Miles from the Land, and abreast of a Bay,
wherein there appear'd to be safe Anchorage, which I called Port
Jackson.* (* Cook having completed his water at Botany Bay, and having
many hundreds of miles of coast before him, did not examine Port Jackson,
the magnificent harbour in which Sydney, the capital of New South Wales,
now lies. His chart gives the shape of what he could see very accurately,
but the main arm of the harbour is hidden from the sea. He named the bay
after Mr. (afterwards Sir George) Jackson, one of the Secretaries of the
Admiralty. This fact is recorded on a tablet in the Bishop Stortford
Church to the memory of Sir George Duckett, which name Sir George had
assumed in later years. This interesting evidence was brought to light by
Sir Alfred Stephen, Lieutenant-Governor of New South Wales, and puts an
end to the legend which was long current, that Port Jackson was named
after a sailor who first saw it. There was, moreover, no person of the
name of Jackson on board.) It lies 3 leagues to the Northward of Botany
Bay. I had almost forgot to mention that it is high water in this Bay at
the full and change of the Moon about 8 o'Clock, and rises and falls upon
a Perpendicular about 4 or 5 feet.

Monday, 7th. Little wind, Southerly, and Serene pleasant Weather. In the
P.M. found the Variation by several Azimuths to be 8 degrees East; at
sunset the Northermost land in sight bore North 26 degrees East; and some
broken land that appear'd to form a bay bore North 40 degrees West,
distant 4 Leagues. This Bay I named Broken bay,* (* The Hawkesbury River,
the largest on the east coast of Australia, runs into Broken Bay.)
Latitude 33 degrees 36 minutes South. We steer'd along shore
North-North-East all night at the distance of about 3 Leagues from the
land, having from 32 to 36 fathoms, hard sandy bottom. A little after sun
rise I took several Azimuths with 4 Needles belonging to the Azimuth
Compass, the mean result of which gave the Variation of 7 degrees 56
minutes East. At Noon we were by observation in the Latitude of 33
degrees 22 minutes South, and about 3 Leagues from the land, the
Northermost part of which in sight bore North 19 degrees East. Some
pretty high land which projected out in 3 bluff Points, and occasioned my
calling it Cape 3 Points (Latitude 33 degrees 33 minutes South), bore
South-West, distant 5 Leagues; Longitude made from Botany Bay 0 degrees
19 minutes East.

Tuesday, 8th. Variable Light Airs and Clear weather. In the P.M. saw some
smooks upon the Shore, and in the Evening found the Variation to be 8
degrees 25 minutes East; at this time we were about 2 or 3 Miles from the
land, and had 28 fathoms Water. Our situation at Noon was nearly the same
as Yesterday, having advanced not one Step to the Northward.

Wednesday, 9th. Winds northerly; most part a fresh breeze, with which we
stood off Shore until 12 at Night. At the distance of 5 Leagues from the
land had 70 fathoms, at the distance of 6 Leagues 80 fathoms, which is
the Extent of the Soundings, for at the Distance of 10 Leagues off we had
no ground with 150 fathoms. Stood in Shore until 8 o'Clock A.M., and
hardly fetched Cape Three Points; having a little wind at North-West by
North, we tack'd, and stood off until Noon, at which Time we Tack'd with
the wind at North-North-East, being then in the Latitude of 33 degrees 37
minutes South, Cape Three Points bearing North West by West, distance 4
Leagues.

Thursday, 10th. In the P.M., had the wind at North-East by North, with
which we stood in Shore until near 4 o'Clock, when we Tack'd in 23
fathoms Water, being about a Mile from the land, and as much to the
Southward of Cape 3 Points. In the night the wind veer'd to North-West
and West, and in the morning to South-West. Having the advantage of a
light Moon, we made the best of our way along shore to the Northward. At
Noon we were by observation in the Latitude of 32 degrees 53 minutes
South, and Longitude 208 degrees 0 minutes West, and about 2 Leagues from
the land, which extended from North 41 degrees East to South 41 degrees
West. A small round rock or Island,* (* Nobby Head, at the entrance of
Newcastle Harbour, formed by the Hunter River. Newcastle is the great
coal port of New South Wales. It has a population of 20,000, and exports
1,500,000 tons of coal in the year.) laying close under the land, bore
South 82 degrees West, distance 3 or 4 Leagues. At sunrise in the Morning
found the Variation to be 8 degrees East. In the Latitude of 33 degrees 2
minutes South, a little way inland, is a remarkable hill, that is shaped
like the Crown of a Hatt, which we past about 9 o'Clock in the forenoon.

[Off Cape Hawke, New South Wales.]

Friday, 11th. Winds Southerly in the day, and in the night Westerly; a
Gentle breeze and Clear weather. At 4 P.M. past, at the distance of one
Mile, a low rocky point which I named Point Stephens (Latitude 32 degrees
45 minutes); on the North side of this point is an inlet which I called
Port Stephens* (* Called after Mr. Stephens, one of the Secretaries to
the Admiralty. It is a large and fine harbour.) (Latitude 32 degrees 40
minutes; Longitude 207 degrees 51 minutes), that appear'd to me from the
Masthead to be shelter'd from all Winds. At the Entrance lay 3 Small
Islands, 2 of which are of a Tolerable height, and on the Main, near the
shore, are some high round hills that make at a distance like Islands. In
passing this bay at the distance of 2 or 3 miles from the Shore our
soundings were from 33 to 27 fathoms; from which I conjectured that there
must be a sufficient depth of Water for Shipping in the bay. We saw
several smokes a little way in the Country upon the flat land; by this I
did suppose that there were Lagoons which afforded subsistance for the
Natives, such as shell-fish, etc., for we as yet know nothing else they
have to live upon. At 1/2 past 5, the Northermost land in sight bore
North 36 degrees East, and Point Stephens South-West, distant 4 Leagues,
at which time we took in our Steerings,* (* Studding sails.) and run
under an Easey sail all night until 4 A.M., when we made all sail; our
soundings in the night were from 48 to 62 fathoms, at the distance of
between 3 and 4 Leagues from the land. At 8 we were abreast of a high
point of Land, which made in 2 Hillocks; this point I called Cape Hawke*
(* After Admiral Sir Edward Hawke, First Lord of the Admiralty.)
(Latitude 32 degrees 14 minutes South, Longitude 207 degrees 30 minutes
West). It bore from us at this time West distant 8 Miles, and the same
time the Northermost land in sight bore North 6 degrees East, and
appear'd high and like an Island. At Noon this land bore North 8 degrees
East, the Northermost land in sight North 13 degrees East, and Cape Hawke
South 37 degrees West. Latitude in per Observation 32 degrees 2 minutes
South, which was 12 Miles to the Southward of that given by the Log,
which I do suppose to be owing to a Current setting that way. Course and
distance sail'd since Yesterday at Noon was first North-East by East, 27
Miles, then North 10 degrees East, 37 Miles; Longitude in 207 degrees 20
minutes West; Variation per morning Amplitude and Azimuth 9 degrees 10
minutes East.

Saturday, 12th. Winds Southerly, a Gentle breeze in the P.M. As we run
along Shore we saw several smokes a little way in land from the Sea, and
one upon the Top of a hill, which was the first we have seen upon
elevated ground since we have been upon the Coast. At sunset we were in
23 fathoms, and about a League and a half from the land, the Northermost
part of which we had in sight bore North 13 degrees East; and 3
remarkable large high hills lying Contigious to each other, and not far
from the shore, bore North-North-West. As these Hills bore some
resemblance to each other we called them the 3 Brothers. We steer'd
North-East by North all Night, having from 27 to 67 fathoms, from 2 to 5
and 6 Leagues from the Land, and at day light we steer'd North for the
Northermost land we had in sight. At noon we were 4 Leagues from the
Land, and by observation in the Latitude of 31 degrees 18 minutes South,
which was 15 miles to the Southward of that given by the Log. Our Course
and distance made good since Yesterday noon was North 24 degrees East, 48
miles. Longitude 206 degrees 58 minutes West; several smokes seen a
little way in land.

Sunday, 13th. In the P.M. stood in shore with the Wind at North-East
until 6, at which time we Tack'd, being about 3 or 4 miles from the land,
and in 24 fathoms. Stood off shore with a fresh breeze at North and
North-North-West until midnight, then Tack'd, being in 118 fathoms and 8
Leagues from the Land. At 3 a.m. the wind veer'd to the Westward, and we
Tack'd and stood to the Northward. At noon we were by Observation in the
Latitude of 30 degrees 43 minutes South, and Longitude 206 degrees 45
minutes West, and about 3 or 4 Leagues from the Land, the Northermost
part of which bore from us North 13 degrees West; and a point or head
land, on which were fires that Caused a great Quantity of smoke, which
occasioned my giving it the name of Smokey Cape, bore South-West, distant
4 Leagues; it is moderately high land. Over the pitch of the point is a
round hillock; within it 2 others, much higher and larger, and within
them very low land (Latitude 30 degrees 51 minutes, Longitude 206 degrees
5 minutes West). Besides the smoke seen upon this Cape we saw more in
several places along the Coast. The observed Latitude was only 5 Miles to
the Southward of the Log.

Monday, 14th. At the P.M. it fell Calm, and continued so about an hour,
when a breeze sprung up at North-East, with which we stood in shore until
6 o'Clock, when, being in 30 fathoms and 3 or 4 Miles from the land, we
Tack'd, having the wind at North-North-West. At this time Smoky Cape bore
South 3/4 degrees West, distant about 5 Leagues, and the Northermost land
in sight North 1/4 degrees East. At 8 we made a Trip in shore for an
hour; after this the wind came off Shore, with which we stood along shore
to the Northward, having from 30 to 21 fathoms, at the distance of 4 or 5
Miles from the Land. At 5 A.M. the Wind veer'd to North, and blow'd a
fresh breeze, attended with Squalls and dark cloudy weather. At 8 it
began to Thunder and Rain, which lasted about an Hour, and then fell
Calm, which gave us an opportunity to sound, and found 86 fathoms, being
about 4 or 5 Leagues from the Land; after this we got the wind Southerly,
a fresh breeze and fair weather, and we Steer'd North by West for the
Northermost land we had in sight. At noon we were about 4 Leagues from
the land, and by observation in the Latitude of 30 degrees 22 minutes
South, which was 9 Miles to the Southward of that given by the Log.
Longitude in 206 degrees 39 minutes West, and Course and distance made
good since Yesterday Noon North 16 degrees East, 22 miles; some Tolerable
high land near the Shore bore West. As I have not mentioned the Aspect of
the Country since we left Botany Bay, I shall now describe it as it hath
at different times appear'd to us. As we have advanced to the Northward
the land hath increased in height, in so much that in this Latitude it
may be called a hilly Country; but between this and Botany Bay it is
diversified with an agreeable variety of Hills, Ridges, and Valleys, and
large plains all Cloathed with wood, which to all appearance is the same
as I have before mentioned, as we could discover no Visible alteration in
the Soil. Near the shore the land is in general low and Sandy, except the
points which are rocky, and over many of them are pretty high hills,
which at first rising out of the Water appear like a Island.

Tuesday, 15th. Fresh Gales at South-West, West-South-West, and
South-South-West. In the P.M. had some heavy Squalls, attended with rain
and hail, which obliged us to close reef our Topsails. Between 2 and 4 we
had some small rocky Islands* (* The Solitary Islands.) between us and
the land; the Southermost lies in the Latitude of 30 degrees 10 minutes,
the Northermost in 29 degrees 58 minutes, and about 2 Leagues or more
from the land; we sounded, and had 33 fathoms about 12 Miles without this
last island. At 8 we brought too until 10, at which time we made sail
under our Topsails. Having the Advantage of the Moon we steer'd along
shore North and North by East, keeping at the distance of about 3 Leagues
from the land having from 30 to 25 fathoms. As soon as it was daylight we
made all the sail we could, having the Advantage of a fresh Gale and fair
weather.* (* During the night the entrance of the Clarence River, now the
outlet for the produce of a large and rich agricultural district, was
passed, and in the morning that of the Richmond River, which serves a
similar purpose.) At 9, being about a League from the Land, we saw upon
it people and Smoke in Several places. At noon we were by observation in
the Latitude of 28 degrees 39 minutes South, and Longitude 206 degrees 27
minutes West; Course and distance saild since Yesterday at Noon North 6
degrees 45 minutes East, 104 Miles. A Tolerable high point of land bore
North-West by West, distant 3 Miles; this point I named Cape Byron* (*
Captain John Byron was one of Cook's predecessors in exploration in the
Pacific, having sailed round the World in H.M.S. Dolphin, in company with
the Tamar, in 1764 to 1766.) (Latitude 28 degrees 37 minutes 30 seconds
South, Longitude 206 degrees 30 minutes West). It may be known by a
remarkable sharp peaked Mountain lying in land North-West by West from
it. From this point the land Trends North 13 degrees West. Inland it is
pretty high and hilly, but near the Shore it is low; to the Southward of
the Point the land is low, and Tolerable level.

[Off Point Danger, New South Wales.]

Wednesday, 16th. Winds Southerly, a fresh Gale, with which we steer'd
North along shore until sunset, at which time we discover'd breakers
ahead, and on our Larboard bow, being at this time in 20 fathoms, and
about 5 miles from the land. Haul'd off East until 8, at which time we
had run 8 Miles, and had increased our Depth of Water to 44 fathoms. We
then brought too with her head to the Eastward, and lay on this Tack
until 10 o'Clock, when, having increased our Soundings to 78 fathoms, we
wore and lay with her head in shore until 5 o'Clock a.m., when we made
Sail. At daylight we were surprized by finding ourselves farther to the
Southward than we were in the evening, and yet it had blown strong all
night Southerly. We now saw the breakers again within us, which we passed
at the distance of about 1 League; they lay in the Latitude of 28 degrees
8 minutes South, and stretch off East 2 Leagues from a point under which
is a small Island; their situation may always be found by the peaked
mountain before mentioned, which bears South-West by West from them, and
on their account I have named it Mount Warning. It lies 7 or 8 Leagues in
land in the Latitude of 28 degrees 22 minutes South. The land is high and
hilly about it, but it is Conspicuous enough to be distinguished from
everything else. The point off which these shoals lay I have named Point
Danger;* (* Point Danger is the boundary point on the coast between New
South Wales and Queensland.) to the Northward of it the land, which is
low, Trends North-West by North; but we soon found that it did not keep
that direction long before it turn'd again to the Northward. At Noon we
were about 2 Leagues from the land, and by observation in the Latitude of
27 degrees 46 minutes, which was 17 Miles to the Southward of the Log;
Longitude 206 degrees 26 minutes West. Mount Warning bore South 20
degrees West, distant 14 Leagues; the Northermost land in sight bore
North. Our Course and distance made good since yesterday North 1 degree
45 minutes West, 53 miles.

[Off Moreton Bay, Queensland.]

Thursday, 17th. Winds Southerly, mostly a fresh breeze, with which in the
P.M. we steer'd along shore North 3/4 East, at the distance of about 2
Leagues off. Between 4 and 5 we discover'd breakers on our Larboard bow;
our Depth of Water at this time was 37 fathoms. At sunset the Northermost
land in sight bore North by West, the breakers North-West by West,
distant 4 Miles, and the Northermost land set at Noon, which form'd a
Point, I named Point Lookout, bore West, distant 5 or 6 Miles (Latitude
27 degrees 6 minutes).* (* There is some mistake in this latitude. It
should be 27 degrees 26 minutes.) On the North side of this point the
shore forms a wide open bay, which I have named Morton's Bay,* (* James,
Earl of Morton, was President of the Royal Society in 1764, and one of
the Commissioners of Longitude.) in the Bottom of which the land is so
low that I could but just see it from the Topmast head. The breakers I
have just mentioned lies about 3 or 4 Miles from Point Lookout; at this
time we had a great Sea from the Southward, which broke prodigious high
upon them. Stood on North-North-East until 8, when, being past the
breakers, and having Deepned our water to 52 fathoms, we brought too
until 12 o'Clock, then made sail to the North-North-East. At 4 A.M. we
sounded, and had 135 fathoms. At daylight I found that we had in the
night got much farther to the Northward and from the Shore than I
expected from the Course we steer'd, for we were at least 6 or 7 Leagues
off, and therefore hauled in North-West by West, having the Advantage of
a Fresh Gale at South-South-West. The Northermost land seen last night
bore from us at this time South-South-West, distant 6 Leagues. This land
I named Cape Morton, it being the North point of the Bay of the same Name
(Latitude 26 degrees 56 minutes South, Longitude 206 degrees 28 minutes).
From Cape Morton the Land Trends away West, further than we could see,
for there is a small space where we could see no land; some on board
where of opinion that there is a River there because the Sea looked paler
than usual. Upon sounding we found 34 fathoms fine white sandy bottom,
which alone is Sufficient change, the apparent Colour of Sea Water,
without the Assistance of Rivers. The land need only to be low here, as
it is in a Thousand other places upon the Coast, to have made it
impossible for us to have seen it at the distance we were off. Be this as
it may, it was a point that could not be clear'd up as we had the wind;
but should any one be desirous of doing it that may come after me, this
place may always be found by 3 Hills which lay to the Northward of it in
the Latitude of 26 degrees 53 minutes South. These hills lay but a little
way inland, and not far from Each other; they are very remarkable on
account of their Singular form of Elivation, which very much resembles
Glass Houses,* (* The Glass houses form a well-known sea mark on entering
Moreton Bay, as the name is now written. Brisbane, the capital of
Queensland, stands on the river of the same name, which falls into
Moreton Bay.) which occasioned my giving them that Name. The Northermost
of the 3 is the highest and largest. There are likewise several other
peaked hills inland to the Northward of these, but they are not near so
remarkable. At Noon we were by Observation in the Latitude of 26 degrees
28 minutes South, which was 10 Miles to the Northward of the Log; a
Circumstance that hath not hapned since we have been upon the Coast
before. Our Course and distance run since Yesterday noon was North by
West 80 Miles, which brought us into the Longitude of 206 degrees 46
minutes. At this time we were about 2 or 3 Leagues from the land, and in
24 fathoms Water; a low bluff point, which was the Southern point of an
open Sandy bay,* (* Laguna Bay. The point is called Low Bluff.) bore
North 52 degrees West, distant 3 Leagues, and the Northermost point of
land in sight bore North 1/4 East. Several Smokes seen to-day, and some
pretty far inland.

Friday, 18th. In steering along shore at the distance of 2 Leagues off
our Soundings was from 24 to 32 fathoms Sandy bottom. At 6 P.M. the North
point set at Noon bore North 1/4 West; distant 4 Leagues; at 10 it bore
North-West by West 1/2 West, and as we had seen no land to the Northward
of it we brought too, not knowing which way to steer, having at this time
but little wind, and continued so for the most part of the night. At 2
P.M. we made sail with the wind at South-West, and at daylight saw the
land extending as far as North 3/4 East. The point set last night bore
South-West by West, distant 3 or 4 Leagues; I have named it Double Island
Point, on account of its figure (Latitude 25 degrees 58 minutes South,
Longitude 206 degrees 48 minutes West). The land within this point is of
a moderate and pretty equal height, but the point itself is of such an
unequal Height that it looks like 2 Small Islands laying under the land;
it likewise may be known by the white Clifts on the North side of it.
Here the land trends to the North-West, and forms a large open bay,* (*
Wide Bay.) in the bottom of which the land appear'd to be very low, in so
much that we could but just see it from the Deck. In crossing the mouth
of this bay our Depth of Water was from 30 to 32 fathoms, a white sandy
bottom. At Noon we were about 3 Leagues from the Land, and in the
Latitude of 25 degrees 34 minutes South, Longitude 206 degrees 45 minutes
West; Double Island Point bore South 3/4 West, and the Northermost land
in sight North 3/4 East. The land hereabouts, which is of a moderate
height, appears more barren than any we have yet seen on this Coast, and
the Soil more sandy, there being several large places where nothing else
is to be seen; in other places the woods look to be low and Shrubby, nor
did we see many signs of inhabitants.

Saturday, 19th. In the P.M. had Variable light Airs, and Calms; in the
night had a light breeze from the land, which in the A.M. veer'd to
South-West and South-South-West. In the evening found the Variation to be
8 degrees 36 minutes East, and in the Morning 8 degrees 20 minutes; as we
had but little wind we keept to the Northward all night, having from 23
to 27 fathoms fine sandy bottom, at the Distance of 2 or 3 Leagues from
the Land. At Noon we were about 4 Miles from it, and by observation in
the Latitude of 25 degrees 4 minutes, and in this situation had but 13
fathoms; the Northermost land in Sight bore North 21 degrees West,
distant 8 Miles; our Course and distance saild since yesterday at Noon
was North 13 degrees 15 minutes East, 31 Miles.

[Off Sandy Cape, Queensland.]

Sunday, 20th. Winds Southerly, Gentle breezes. At 10 p.m. we passed, at
the distance of 4 Miles, having 17 fathoms, a black bluff head or point
of land, on which a number of the Natives were Assembled, which
occasioned my naming it Indian Head; Latitude 25 degrees 0 minutes North
by West, 4 Miles from this head, is another much like it. From this last
the land Trends a little more to the Westward, and is low and Sandy next
the Sea, for what may be behind it I know not; if land, it must be all
low, for we could see no part of it from the Mast head. We saw people in
other places besides the one I have mentioned; some Smokes in the day and
fires in the Night. Having but little wind all Night, we keept on to the
Northward, having from 17 to 34 fathoms, from 4 Miles to 4 Leagues from
the Land, the Northermost part of which bore from us at daylight
West-South-West, and seem'd to End in a point, from which we discover'd a
Reef stretching out to the Northward as far as we could see, being, at
this time, in 18 fathoms; for we had, before it was light, hauld our Wind
to the Westward, and this course we continued until we had plainly
discover'd breakers a long way upon our Lee Bow, which seem'd to Stretch
quite home to the land. We then Edged away North-West and
North-North-West, along the East side of the Shoal, from 2 to 1 Miles
off, having regular, even Soundings, from 13 to 7 fathoms; fine sandy
bottom. At Noon we were, by Observation, in the Latitude of 24 degrees 26
minutes South, which was 13 Miles to the Northward of that given by the
Log. The extream point of the Shoal we judged to bear about North-West of
us; and the point of land above-mentioned bore South 3/4 West, distant 20
Miles. This point I have named Sandy Cape,* (* Sandy Cape is the northern
point of Great Sandy Island. A long narrow channel separates the latter
from the mainland, and opens at its northern end into Harvey Bay, a great
sheet of water 40 miles across. This channel is now much used by the
coasting trade, as it avoids the long detour round Breaksea Spit, a most
dangerous shoal.) on account of 2 very large white Patches of Sand upon
it. It is of a height Sufficient to be seen 12 Leagues in Clear weather
(Latitude 24 degrees 46 minutes, Longitude 206 degrees 51 minutes West);
from it the Land trends away West-South-West and South-West as far as we
could see.

Monday, 21st. In the P.M. we keept along the East side of the Shoal until
2, when, judging there was water for us over, I sent a Boat a Head to
sound, and upon her making the Signal for more than 5 fathoms we hauld
our wind and stood over the Tail of it in 6 fathoms. At this time we were
in the Latitude of 24 degrees 22 minutes South, and Sandy Cape bore South
1/2 East, distant 8 Leagues; but the Direction of the Shoal is nearest
North-North-West and South-South-East. At this time we had 6 fathoms; the
boat which was not above 1/4 of a mile to the Southward of us had little
more than 5 fathoms. From 6 fathoms we had the next Cast, 13, and then 20
immediately, as fast as the Man could heave the Lead; from this I did
suppose that the West side of the Shoal is pretty steep too, whereas on
the other side we had gradual Soundings from 13 to 7 fathoms. This Shoal
I called Break Sea Spit, because now we had smooth water, whereas upon
the whole Coast to the Southward of it we had always a high Sea or swell
from the South-East. At 6, the Land of Sandy Cape extending from South 17
degrees East to South 27 degrees East, distance 8 Leagues; Depth of
Water, 23 fathoms, which depth we keept all Night, as we stood to the
Westward with light Airs from the Southward; but between 12 and 4 A.M. we
had it Calm, after which a Gentle breeze sprung up at South, with which
we still keept on upon a Wind to the Westward. At 7 we Saw from the
Masthead the Land of Sandy Cape bearing South-East 1/2 East, distance 12
or 13 Leagues. At 9, we discover'd from the Mast head land to the
Westward, and soon after saw smooke upon it. Our depth of Water was now
decreased to 17 fathoms, and by Noon to 13, at which time we were by
observation in the Latitude of 24 degrees 28 minutes South, and about 7
Leagues from the Land, which extended from South by West to
West-North-West. Longitude made from Sandy Cape 0 degrees 45 minutes
West.

For these few days past we have seen at times a sort of Sea fowl we have
no where seen before that I remember; they are of the sort called
Boobies. Before this day we seldom saw more than 2 or 3 at a time, and
only when we were near the land. Last night a small flock of these birds
passed the Ship and went away to the North-West, and this morning from
1/2 an hour before sun rise to half an hour after, flights of them were
continually coming from the North-North-West, and flying to the
South-South-East, and not one was seen to fly in any other direction.
From this we did suppose that there was a Lagoon, River, or Inlet of
Shallow Water to the Southward of us, where these birds resorted to in
the day to feed, and that not very far to the Northward lay some Island,
where they retir'd too in the night.

Tuesday, 22nd. In the P.M. had a Gentle breeze at South-East, with which
we stood in for the land South-West until 4, when, being in the Latitude
of 24 degrees 36 minutes South, and about 2 Leagues from land, in 9
fathoms, we bore away along shore North-West by West; at the same time we
could see the land extending to the South-South-East about 8 Leagues.
Near the Sea the land is very low, but inland are some moderately high
hills, and the whole appeared to be thickly Cloathed with wood. In
running along shore we shoalded our Water from 9 to 7 fathoms, and at one
time had but 6 fathoms, which determined me to Anchor for the Night, and
accordingly at 8 o'Clock we came too in 8 fathoms, fine gravelly bottom,
about 5 miles from the land. This evening we saw a Water Snake, and 2 or
3 evenings ago one lay under the Ship's Stern some time; this was about 1
1/2 Yards in length, and was the first we had seen. At 6 A.M. weighed
with a Gentle breeze Southerly, and Steer'd North-West 1/4 West, edging
in for the land until we got Within 2 Miles of it, having from 7 to 11
fathoms; we then steer'd North-North-West as the land laid. At Noon we
were by Observation in the Latitude of 24 degrees 19 minutes South;
Longitude made from Sandy Cape 1 degree 14 minutes West.

[At Anchor. Bustard Bay, Queensland.]

Wednesday, 23rd. Continued our Course alongshore at the distance of about
2 Miles off, having from 12 to 9, 8 and 7 fathoms, until 5 o'Clock, at
which time we were abreast of the South point of a Large open Bay,* (*
Bustard Bay.) wherein I intended to Anchor. Accordingly we hauld in Close
upon a Wind, and sent a boat ahead to sound; after making some Trips we
Anchored at 8 o'Clock in 5 fathoms, a Sandy bottom. The South point of
the bay bore East 3/4 South, distant 2 Miles; the North point North-West
1/4 North, about 2 Miles from the shore, in the bottom of the bay. Last
night, some time in the Middle watch, a very extraordinary affair hapned
to Mr. Orton, my Clerk. He having been drinking in the evening, some
Malicious person or persons in the Ship took Advantage of his being
Drunk, and cut off all the Cloaths from off his back; not being satisfied
with this, they some time after went into his Cabin and cut off a part of
both his Ears as he lay a Sleep in his Bed. The person whom he suspected
to have done this was Mr. Magra, one of the Midshipmen; but this did not
appear to me. Upon enquiry, however, as I had been told that Magra had
once or twice before this in their drunken Frolicks cut off his cloaths,
and had been heard to say (as I was told) that if it was not for the Law
he would Murder him, these things consider'd, induced me to think that
Magra was not Altogether innocent. I therefore for the present dismiss'd
him the Quarter deck, and Suspended him from doing any duty in the Ship,
he being one of those Gentlemen frequently found on board King's Ships
that can very well be spared; besides, it was necessary in me to show my
immediate resentment against the person on whom the suspicion fell, least
they should not have stop'd here. With respect to Mr. Orton, he is a man
not without faults; yet from all the inquiry I could make, it evidently
appear'd to me that so far from deserving such Treatment, he had not
designed injuring any person in the Ship; so that I do--and shall
always--look upon him as an injured man. Some reasons, however, might be
given why this misfortune came upon him, in which he himself was in some
measure to blame; but as this is only conjecture, and would tend to fix
it upon some people in the Ship, whom I would fain believe would hardly
be guilty of such an Action, I shall say nothing about it, unless I shall
hereafter discover the Offenders, which I shall take every method in my
power to do, for I look upon such proceedings as highly dangerous in such
Voyages as this, and the greatest insult that could be offer'd to my
Authority in this Ship, as I have always been ready to hear and redress
every complaint that have been made against any Person in the Ship.* (*
This history of Mr. Orton's misadventure is omitted from the Admiralty
copy. It is an illustration of the times to note that the fact of Orton
having got drunk does not seem to call for the Captain's severe censure.
In these days, though the practical joker receives punishment, the
drunkard would certainly come in for a large share also.)

In the A.M. I went ashore with a party of men in order to Examine the
Country, accompanied by Mr. Banks and the other Gentlemen; we landed a
little within the South point of the Bay, where there is a Channel
leading into a large Lagoon. The first thing that I did was to sound and
examine the Channell, in which I found 3 fathoms, until I got about a
Mile up it, where I met with a Shoal, whereon was little more than one
fathom; being over this I had 3 fathoms again. The Entrance into this
Channell lies close to the South point of this Bay, being form'd on the
East by the Shore, and on the West by a large Spit of sand; it is about a
1/4 of a Mile broad, and lies in South by West; here is room for a few
Ships to lay very secure, and a small Stream of Fresh Water. After this I
made a little excursion into the Woods while some hands made 3 or 4 hauls
with the Sean, but caught not above a dozen very small fish. By this time
the flood was made, and I imbarqued in the Boats in order to row up the
Lagoon; but in this I was hindred by meeting everywhere with Shoal Water.
As yet we had seen no people, but saw a great deal of Smook up and on the
West side of the Lagoon, which was all too far off for us to go by land,
excepting one; this we went to and found 10 Small fires in a very small
Compass, and some Cockle Shells laying by them, but the people were gone.
On the windward or South side of one of the fires was stuck up a little
Bark about a foot and a half high, and some few pieces lay about in other
places; these we concluded were all the covering they had in the Night,
and many of them, I firmly believe, have not this, but, naked as they
are, sleep in the open air. Tupia, who was with us, observed that they
were Taata Eno's; that is, bad or poor people. The Country is visibly
worse than at the last place we were at; the soil is dry and Sandy, and
the woods are free from underwoods of every kind; here are of the same
sort of Trees as we found in Bottany Harbour, with a few other sorts. One
sort, which is by far the most Numerous sort of any in the Woods, grow
Something like birch; the Bark at first sight looks like birch bark, but
upon examination I found it to be very different, and so I believe is the
wood; but this I could not examine, as having no axe or anything with me
to cut down a Tree. About the Skirts of the Lagoon grows the true
Mangrove, such as are found in the West Indies, and which we have not
seen during the Voyage before; here is likewise a sort of a palm Tree,
which grows on low, barren, sandy places in the South Sea Islands. All,
or most of the same sort, of Land and Water fowl as we saw at Botany
Harbour we saw here; besides these we saw some Bustards, such as we have
in England, one of which we kill'd that weighed 17 1/2 pounds, which
occasioned my giving this place the Name of Bustard Bay (Latitude 24
degrees 4 minutes, Longitude 208 degrees 22 minutes West); we likewise
saw some black and white Ducks. Here are plenty of small Oysters sticking
to the Rocks, Stones, and Mangrove Trees, and some few other shell fish,
such as large Muscles, Pearl Oysters, Cockels, etc. I measured the
perpendicular height of the last Tide, and found it to be 8 foot above
low water mark, and from the time of low water to-day I found that it
must be high Water at the full and Change of the Moon at 8 o'Clock.

Thursday, 24th. In the P.M. I was employ'd ashore in the Transactions
before related; at 4 a.m. we weighed with a Gentle breeze at South, and
made sail out of the Bay. In standing out our soundings were from 5 to 15
fathoms; when in this last Depth we were abreast of the North Point, and
being daylight we discover'd breakers stretching out from it about
North-North-East, 2 or 3 miles; at the Outermost point of them is a Rock
just above Water. In passing these rocks at the distance of 1/2 a mile we
had from 15 to 20 fathoms; being past them, we hauld along shore
West-North-West for the farthest land we had in sight. At Noon we were by
Observation in the Latitude of 23 degrees 52 minutes South; the North
part of Bustard Bay bore South 62 degrees East, distance 10 miles, and
the Northermost land in sight North 60 degrees West. Longitude in 208
degrees 37 minutes West, distance from the nearest shore 6 Miles; in this
situation had 14 fathoms water.

[Off Cape Capricorn, Queensland.]

Friday, 25th. In the P.M. had it calm until 5, when a light breeze sprung
up at South-East, and we steer'd North-West as the land lay until 10,
then brought too, having had all along 14 and 15 fathoms. At 5 A.M. we
made sail; at daylight the Northermost point of the Main bore North 70
degrees West, and soon after we saw more land making like Islands,
bearing North-West by North; at 9 we were abreast of the point, distant
from it 1 mile; Depth of Water 14 fathoms. I found this point to lay
directly under the Tropic of Capricorn, and for that reason call it by
that Name. Longitude 209 degrees 0 minutes West. It is of a Moderate
height, and looks white and barren, and may be known by some Islands
which lie to the North-West of it, and some small Rocks one League
South-East from it; on the West side of the Cape there appeared to be a
Lagoon. On the 2 Spits which form the Entrance were a great Number of
Pelicans; at least, so I call them. The most northermost land we could
see bore from Cape Capricorn North 24 degrees West, and appeared to be an
Island;* (* Hummocky Island.) but the Main land Trended West by North 1/2
North, which Course we steer'd, having from 15 to 16 fathoms and from 6
to 9, a hard sandy bottom. At Noon our Latitude by Observation was 23
degrees 24 minutes South; Cape Capricorn bore South 60 degrees East,
distance 2 Leagues; a small Island North by East 2 Miles. In this
Situation had 9 fathoms at the distance of 4 Miles from the Main land,
which is here low and Sandy next the Sea, except the points which are
moderately high and rocky; in land the Country is hilly, and affords but
a very indifferent prospect.* (* Between Bustard Bay and Cape Capricorn
is Port Curtis, in which stands the small town of Gladstone. Cape
Capricorn is the eastern point of Curtis Island, and to the northward is
Keppel Bay, into which falls the Fitzroy River. Up the latter, 35 miles
from the sea, is Rockhampton, the second largest town of Queensland. All
this coast is encumbered with shoals, outside of which Cook had so far
prudently kept. To seaward begins the long chain of islands and reefs
known as the Great Australian Barrier, which stretches up to Torres
Straits. Cook was unaware of their existence, as they were out of sight,
but he became painfully acquainted with them later, where the reefs
approach the land, and make navigation along the coast anxious work; but
he here began to get into difficulties with the shoals which stretch off
the coast itself.)

Saturday, 26th. In the P.M. light breezes at East-South-East, with which
we stood to the North-West until 4 o'Clock, when it fell calm, and soon
after we Anchored in 12 fathoms. Cape Capricorn bearing South 54 degrees
East, distant 4 Leagues, having the Main land and Islands in a manner all
around us. In the night we found the tide to rise and fall near 7 feet,
and the flood to set to the Westward and Ebb to the Eastward; which is
quite the reverse to what we found it when at Anchor to the Eastward of
Bustard Bay. At 6 a.m. we weigh'd with the Wind at South, a Gentle
breeze, and stood away to the North-West, between the Outermost range of
Islands* (* The Keppel Islands.) and the Main land, leaving several small
Islands between us and the Latter, which we passed Close by. Our
soundings was a little irregular, from 12 to 4 fathoms, which caused me
to send a Boat ahead to sound. At noon we were about 3 Miles from the
Main, about the same distance from the Islands without us; our Latitude
by Observation was 23 degrees 7 minutes South, and Longitude made from
Cape Capricorn 18 Miles West. The Main land in this Latitude is tolerable
high and Mountainious; and the Islands which lay off it are the most of
them pretty high and of a Small Circuit, and have more the appearance of
barrenness than fertility. We saw smookes a good way in land, which makes
me think there must be a River, Lagoon, or Inlet, into the Country, and
we passed 2 places that had the Appearance of such this morning; but our
Depth of Water at that Time was too little to haul in for them, where I
might expect to meet with less.

Sunday, 27th. We had not stood on to the Northward quite an hour before
we fell into 3 fathoms, upon which I anchor'd, and Sent away the Master
with 2 Boats to sound the Channell, which lay to Leeward of us between
the Northermost Island and the Main Land, which appear'd to me to be
pretty broad; but I suspected that it was Shoal, and so it was found, for
the Master reported to me upon his return that he found in many places
only 2 1/2 fathoms, and where we lay at Anchor we had only 16 feet, which
was not 2 feet more than the Ship drew.* (* This was between Great Keppel
Island and the Main. There is a mass of shoals here.) In the Evening the
wind veer'd to East-North-East, which gave us an opportunity to stretch 3
or 4 miles back the way we Came before the Wind Shifted to South, and
obliged us again to Anchor in 6 fathoms. At 5 o'Clock in the A.M. I sent
away the Master with 2 Boats to search for a Passage out between the
Islands, while the Ship got under sail. As soon as it was light the
Signal was made by the boats of their having found a Passage, upon which
we hoisted in the Boats, and made sail to the Northward as the land lay;
soundings from 9 to 15 fathoms, having still Some small Islands without
us.* (* The ship passed out between Great Keppel Island and North Keppel
Island.) At noon we were about 2 Leagues from the Main Land, and by
observation in the Latitude of 22 degrees 53 minutes South, Longitude
made from Cape Capricorn 0 degrees 20 minutes West. At this time the
Northermost point of Land we had in sight bore North-North-West, distance
10 Miles; this point I named Cape Manyfold, from the Number of high Hills
over it; Latitude 22 degrees 43 minutes South; it lies North 20 degrees
West, distant 17 Leagues from Cape Capricorn. Between them the shore
forms a large Bay, which I call'd Keppel Bay, and the Islands which lay
in and Off it are known by the same name; in this Bay is good Anchorage,
where there is a sufficient depth of Water; what refreshment it may
afford for Shipping I know not.* (* As before mentioned, the Fitzroy
River falls into Keppel Bay, and forms a good harbour, though much
encumbered with sand banks.) We caught no fish here, notwithstanding we
were at Anchor; it can hardly be doubted but what it afforded fresh Water
in several places, as both Mainland and Islands are inhabited. We saw
smokes by day and fires in the night upon the Main, and people upon one
of the Islands.

[Off Cape Townshend, Queensland.]

Monday, 28th. Winds at South-South-East, a fresh breeze. At 3 o'Clock in
the P.M. we passed Cape Manifold, from which the Land Trends
North-North-West. The land of this Cape is tolerable high, and riseth in
hills directly from the Sea; it may be known by 3 Islands laying off it,
one near the Shore, and the other 2 Eight Miles out at Sea; the one of
these is low and flat, and the other high and round.* (* Peak and Flat
Islands.) At 6 o'Clock we shortned sail and brought too; the Northermost
part of the Main we had in sight bore North-West, and some Islands lying
off it bore North 31 degrees West; our soundings since Noon were from 20
to 25 fathoms, and in the Night 30 and 34 fathoms. At day light we made
Sail, Cape Manifold bearing South by East, distance 8 Leagues, and the
Islands set last night in the same directions, distance from us 4 Miles.
The farthest point of the Main bore North 67 degrees West, distant 22
Miles; but we could see several Islands to the Northward of this
direction.* (* The easternmost of the Northumberland Islands.) At 9
o'Clock we were abreast of the above point, which I named Cape Townshend*
(* Charles Townshend was Chancellor of the Exchequer 1767.) (Latitude 22
degrees 13 minutes, Longitude 209 degrees 48 minutes West); the land of
this Cape is of a moderate and pretty even height, and is more barren
than woody. Several Islands lay to the Northward of it, 4 or 5 Leagues
out at Sea. 3 or 4 Leagues to the South-East the Shore forms a bay,* (*
Shoalwater Bay, a large inlet.) in the bottom of which there appeared to
be an inlet or Harbour to the Westward of the Coast, and Trends
South-West 1/2 South; and these form a very large Bay, which turns away
to the Eastward, and probably communicates with the Inlet above
mentioned, and by that Means makes the land of the Cape an Island. As
soon as we got round the Cape we hauld our wind to the Westward in order
to get within the Islands which lay scatter'd up and down in this bay in
great number, and extend out to Sea as far as we could see from the
Masthead; how much farther will hardly be in my power to determine; they
are as Various in their height and Circuit as they are numerous.* (* The
Northumberland islands, a very extensive group.) We had not stood long
upon a Wind before we meet with Shoal Water, and was obliged to Tack
about to avoid it; after which I sent a boat ahead, and we bore away West
by North, leaving many small Islands, Rocks, and Shoals between us and
the Main, and a number of Large Islands without us; soundings from 14 to
17 fathoms, Sandy Bottom. A little before noon the boat made the Signal
for meeting with Shoal Water, upon which we hauld close upon a Wind to
the Eastward, but suddenly fell into 3 1/4 fathoms water, upon which we
immediately let go an Anchor, and brought the Ship up with all sails
standing, and had then 4 fathoms Coarse sandy bottom. We found here a
strong Tide setting to the North-West by West 1/2 West, at the rate of
between 2 and 3 Miles an Hour, which was what Carried us so quickly upon
the Shoal. Our Latitude by Observation was 22 degrees 8 minutes South;
Cape Townshend bore East 16 degrees South, distant 13 Miles, and the
Westermost part of the Main Land in sight West 3/4 North, having a number
of Islands in sight all round us.* (* The ship was on the Donovan Shoal
in Broad Sound Channel.)

Tuesday, 29th. Fresh gales between the South-South-East and
East-South-East, Hazey weather, with some showers of rain. In the P.M.,
having sounded about the Ship, and found that their was Sufficient Water
for her over the Shoal, we at 3 o'clock weigh'd and made Sail, and stood
to the Westward as the Land lay, having first sent a boat ahead to sound.
At 6 we Anchor'd in 10 fathoms, Sandy bottom, about 2 Miles from the Main
Land, the Westermost part of which bore West-North-West, having still a
Number of Islands in sight a long way without us. At 5 a.m. I sent away
the Master with 2 Boats to sound the Entrance of an inlet, which bore
from us West, distance about 1 League, into which I intended to go with
the Ship to wait a few days, until the Moon increased, and in the
meantime to examine the Country. By such time as we had got the Ship
under Sail the Boats made the Signal for Anchorage, upon which we stood
in with the Ship, and Anchor'd in 5 fathoms, about a League within the
Entrance of the inlet, which we judged to be a River running a Good way
inland, as I observed the Tides to flow and Ebb something considerable.*
(* It is in reality a narrow channel which runs into Broad Sound.) I had
some thoughts of laying the Ship a Shore to Clean her bottom. With this
view both the Master and I went to look for a Convenient place for that
purpose, and at the same time to look for fresh Water, not one drop of
which we could find, but met with several places where a Ship might be
laid ashore with safety.

[At Anchor, Thirsty Sound.]

Wednesday, 30th. In the P.M. I went again in search of Fresh Water, but
had no better success than before; wherefore I gave over all thoughts of
laying the Ship a Shore, being resolved to spend as little time as
possible in a place that was likely to afford us no sort of refreshment.
But as I had observed from the Hills the inlet to run a good way in, I
thought this a good time to penetrate into the Country to see a little of
the inland parts. Accordingly I prepared for making that Excursion in the
morning, but the first thing I did was to get upon a pretty high Hill,
which is at the North-West entrance of the inlet, before Sunrise, in
order to take a view of the Sea Coast and Islands, etc., that lay off it,
and to take their bearings, having the Azimuth Compass with me for that
purpose, the Needle of which differ'd from its True position something
very considerable, even above 30 degrees, in some places more, and in
other less, for I try'd it in several places. I found it differ in itself
above 2 points in the space of about 14 feet. The loose stones which lay
upon the Ground had no effect upon the Needle; I therefore concluded that
it must be owing to Iron Ore upon the Hill, visible signs of which
appeared not only here, but in several other places. As soon as I had
done here I proceeded up the inlet. I set out with the first of the
flood, and long before high water got about 8 Leagues up it; its breadth
thus far was from 2 to 4 or 5 Miles upon a South-West by South direction;
but here it spread every way, and formed a Large lake, which communicated
with the Sea to the North-West. I not only saw the Sea in this direction,
but found the tide of flood coming strong in from the North-West. I
likewise observ'd an Arm of this Lake extending to the Eastward, and it
is not at all improbable but what it Communicates with the Sea in the
bottom of the bay, which lies to the Westward of Cape Townshend.* (* This
is exactly what it does.) On the South side of the Lake is a ridge of
pretty high hills, which I was desirous of going upon; but as the day was
far spent and high water, I was afraid of being bewilder'd among the
Shoals in the night, which promised to be none of the best, being already
rainy, dirty weather, and therefore I made the best of my way to the
Ship. In this little Excursion I saw only 2 people, and those at a
distance, and are all that we have seen in this place, but we have met
with several fire places, and seen smokes at a distance. This inlet,
which I have named Thirsty Sound, by reason we could find no fresh Water,
lies in the Latitude of 22 degrees 05 minutes South, and Longitude 210
degrees 24 West; it may be known by a Group of small Islands Laying under
the shore from 2 to 5 Leagues North-West from it.* (* Barren Islands.)
There is likewise another Group of Islands laying right before it between
3 and 4 Leagues out at Sea.* (* Duke Islands.) Over each of the Points
that form the Entrance is a pretty high, round Hill; that on the
North-West is a Peninsula, surrounded by the Sea at high water; the
distance from the one to the other is about 2 Miles bold to both Shores.
Here is good Anchoring in 7, 6, 5, and 4 fathoms water, and very
Convenient places for laying a Ship ashore, where at Spring Tides the
tides doth not rise less than 16 or 18 feet, and flows at full and Change
of the Moon about 11 o'Clock. We met with no fresh water, or any other
kind of refreshments whatever; we saw 2 Turtle, but caught none, nor no
sort of Fish or wild fowl, except a few small land birds. Here are the
same sort of Water Fowl as we saw in Botany Bay, and like them, so shy
that it is hardly possible to get within shott of them. No signs of
Fertility is to be seen upon the Land; the Soil of the up lands is mostly
a hard, redish Clay, and produceth several sorts of Trees, such as we
have seen before, and some others, and clear of all underwoods. All the
low lands are mostly overrun with Mangroves, and at Spring tides
overflow'd by the Sea; and I believe in the rainy Seasons here are large
land floods, as we saw in many places Gullies, which seem'd to have been
made by torrents of Water coming from the Adjacent hills, besides other
Visible signs of the Water having been a Considerable height above the
Common Spring Tides. Dr. Solander and I was upon a rising Ground up the
inlet, which we thought had at one time or another been overflow'd by the
Sea, and if so great part of the Country must at that time been laid
under Water. Up in the lakes, or lagoons, I suppose, are shell fish, on
which the few Natives subsist. We found Oysters sticking to most of the
Rocks upon the Shore, which were so small, as not to be worth the picking
off.* (* Cook was very unfortunate in his landing here. The channel is at
the end of a long headland between two bays, Shoalwater Bay and Broad
Sound, and was a very unlikely place either to find water or get any true
idea of the country.)

Thursday, 31st. Winds Southerly and South-East; Dark, Hazey weather, with
rain. In the P.M., finding no one inducement to stay longer in this
place, we at 6 a.m. Weighed and put to Sea, and stood to the North-West,
having the Advantage of a fresh breeze at South-South-East. We keept
without the Group of Islands which lay in Shore, and to the North-West of
Thirsty Sound, as there appear'd to be no safe passage between them and
the Main; at the same time we had a number of Islands without us
extending out to Sea as far as we could see; as we run in this direction
our depth of Water was 10, 8 and 9 fathoms.* (* The ship passed between
the Duke Islands and the maze of reefs and islands lying North-West of
Thirsty Sound.) At Noon the North-West point of Thirsty Sound, which I
have named Pier head, bore South 36 degrees East, distant 5 Leagues; the
East point of the other inlet, which Communicates with the former, as I
have before mentioned, bore South by West, distance 2 1/2 Leagues, the
Group of Islands above mentioned laying between us and the point. The
farthest part of the Main in sight, on the other side of the inlet, bore
North-West; our Latitude by Observation was 21 degrees 53 minutes South.

[June 1770.]

Friday, June 1st. At 1/2 an hour After Noon, upon the Boat we had ahead
sounding making the Signal for Shoal Water, we hauld our wind to the
North-East, having at that time 7 fathoms; the Next cast 5, and then 3,
upon which we let go an Anchor, and brought the Ship up. The North-West
point of Thirsty Sound, or Pier Head, bore South-East, distance 6
Leagues, being Midway between the Islands which lies off the East point
of the Western inlet and 3 Small Islands directly without them,* (* The
shoal is now known as Lake Shoal. The three Islands are the Bedwell
Islands.) it being now the first of the flood which we found to set
North-West by West 1/2 West. After having sounded about the Shoal, on
which we found not quite 3 fathoms, but without it deep water, we got
under Sail, and hauld round the 3 Islands just mentioned, and came to an
Anchor under the Lee of them in 15 fathoms, having at this time dark,
hazey, rainy weather, which continued until 7 o'Clock a.m., at which time
we got again under sail, and stood to the North-West with a fresh breeze
at South-South-East and fair weather, having the Main land in Sight and a
Number of Islands all round us, some of which lay out at Sea as far as we
could See. The Western Inlet before mentioned, known in the Chart by the
Name of Broad Sound, we had now all open. It is at least 9 or 10 Leagues
wide at the Entrance, with several Islands laying in and before, and I
believe Shoals also, for we had very irregular Soundings, from 10 to 5
and 4 fathoms. At Noon we were by Observation in the Latitude of 21
degrees 29 minutes South, and Longitude made from Cape Townshend 59
degrees West. A point of Land, which forms the North-West Entrance into
Broad Sound, bore from us at this Time West, distance 3 Leagues; this
Cape I have named Cape Palmerston* (* Henry Viscount Palmerston was a
Lord of the Admiralty, 1766 to 1778.) (Latitude 21 degrees 27 minutes
South, Longitude 210 degrees 57 minutes West). Between this Cape and Cape
Townshend lies the Bay of Inlets, so named from the Number of Inlets,
Creeks, etc., in it.* (* The name Bay of Inlets has disappeared from the
charts. Cook applied it to the whole mass of bays in this locality,
covering over 60 miles. A look at a modern chart causes amazement that
Cook managed to keep his ship off the ground, as the whole sea in his
track is strewed with dangers.)

[Off Cape Hillsborough, Queensland.]

Saturday, 2nd. Winds at South-South-East and South-East, a gentle breeze,
with which we stood to the North-West and North-West by North, as the
land lay, under an easey Sail. Having a boat ahead, found our Soundings
at first were very irregular, from 9 to 4 fathoms; but afterwards
regular, from 9 to 11 fathoms. At 8, being about 2 Leagues from the Main
Land, we Anchor'd in 11 fathoms, Sandy bottom. Soon after this we found a
Slow Motion of a Tide seting to the Eastward, and rode so until 6, at
which time the tide had risen 11 feet; we now got under Sail, and Stood
away North-North-West as the land lay. From the Observations made on the
tide last Night it is plain that the flood comes from the North-West;
whereas Yesterday and for Several days before we found it to come from
the South-East. This is neither the first nor second time that we have
observed the same thing, and in my Opinion easy accounted for; but this I
shall do in another place. At sun rise we found the Variation to be 6
degrees 45 minutes East. In steering along shore between the Island and
the Main, at the Distance of 2 Leagues from the Latter, and 3 or 4 from
the former, our soundings were Regular, from 12 to 9 fathoms; but about
11 o'Clock we were again embarrassed with Shoal Water,* (* Blackwood
Shoals.) but got clear without letting go an Anchor; we had at one time
not quite 3 fathoms. At Noon we were about 2 Leagues from the Main land,
and about 4 from the Islands without us; our Latitude by Observation was
20 degrees 56 minutes South, Longitude made from Cape Palmerston 16
degrees West; a pretty high Promontory, which I named Cape Hillsborough,*
(* Earl of Hillsborough was the First Secretary of State for the
Colonies, and President of the Board of Trade when the Endeavour sailed.)
bore West 1/2 North, distant 7 Miles. The Main Land is here pretty much
diversified with Mountains, Hills, plains, and Vallies, and seem'd to be
tollerably Cloathed with Wood and Verdure. These Islands, which lay
Parrallel with the Coast, and from 5 to 8 or 9 Leagues off, are of
Various Extent, both for height and Circuit; hardly any Exceeds 5 Leagues
in Circuit, and many again are very small.* (* The Cumberland Islands.
They stretch along the coast for 60 miles.) Besides the Chain of Islands,
which lay at a distance from the Coast, there are other Small Ones laying
under the Land. Some few smokes were seen on the Main land.

Sunday, 3rd. Winds between the South by East and South-East. A Gentle
breeze and Clear weather. In the P.M. we steer'd along shore North-West
1/2 West, at the distance of 2 Leagues from the Main, having 9 and 10
fathoms regular soundings. At sun set the furthest point of the Main Land
that we could distinguish as such bore North 48 degrees West; to the
Northward of this lay some high land, which I took to be an Island, the
North West point of which bore North 41 degrees West; but as I was not
sure that there was a passage this way, we at 8 came to an Anchor in 10
fathoms, muddy bottom. 2 hours after this we had a tide setting to the
Northward, and at 2 o'clock it had fallen 9 Feet since the time we
Anchored. After this the Tide began to rise, and the flood came from the
Northward, which was from the Islands out at Sea, and plainly indicated
that there was no passage to the North-West; but as this did not appear
at day light when we got under Sail, and stood away to the North-West
until 8, at this time we discover'd low land, quite a Cross what we took
for an Opening between the Main and the Islands, which proved to be a Bay
about 5 or 6 Leagues deep. Upon this we hauld our wind to the Eastward
round the Northermost point of the Bay, which bore from us at this time
North-East by North, distance 4 Leagues. From this point we found the
Main land trend away North by West 1/2 West, and a Strait or Passage
between it and a Large Island* (* Whitsunday Island.) or Islands laying
in a Parrallel direction with the Coast; this passage we Stood into,
having the Tide of Ebb in our favour. At Noon we were just within the
Entrance, and by observation in the Latitude of 20 degrees 26 minutes
South; Cape Hillsborough bore South by East, distant 10 Leagues, and the
North point of the Bay before mentioned bore South 19 degrees West,
distance 4 Miles. This point I have named Cape Conway* (* General H.S.
Conway was Secretary of State 1765 to 1768.) (Latitude 20 degrees 30
minutes, Longitude 211 degrees 28 minutes), and the bay, Repulse Bay,
which is formed by these 2 Capes. The greatest and least depth of Water
we found in it was 13 and 8 fathoms; every where safe Anchoring, and I
believe, was it properly examined, there would be found some good Harbour
in it, especIally on the North Side within Cape Conway, for just within
the Cape lay 2 or 3 Small Islands, which alone would shelter that side of
the Bay from the South-East and Southerly winds, which seem to be the
prevailing or Trade Winds. Among the many islands that lay upon this
Coast there is one more Remarkable than the rest,* (* Probably Blacksmith
Island.) being of a Small circuit, very high and peaked, and lies East by
South, 10 Miles from Cape Conway at the South end of the Passage above
mention'd.

[In Whitsunday Passage, Queensland.]

Monday, 4th. Winds at South-South-East and South-East, a Gentle breeze
and Clear weather. In the P.M. Steerd thro' the passage* (* Whitsunday
Passage. The aspect of the shores is very pleasing.) which we found from
3 to 6 or 7 Miles broad, and 8 or 9 Leagues in length, North by West 1/2
West and South by East 1/2 East. It is form'd by the Main on the West,
and by Islands on the East, one of which is at least 5 Leagues in length.
Our Depth of Water in running thro' was between 25 and 20 fathoms;
everywhere good Anchorage; indeed the whole passage is one Continued safe
Harbour, besides a Number of small Bays and Coves on each side, where
ships might lay as it where in a Bason; at least so it appear'd to me,
for I did not wait to Examine it, as having been in Port so lately, and
being unwilling to loose the benefit of a light Moon. The land, both on
the Main and Islands, especially on the former, is Tolerably high, and
distinguished by Hills and Vallies, which are diversified with Woods and
Lawns that looked green and pleasant. On a Sandy beach upon one of the
Islands we saw 2 people and a Canoe, with an outrigger, which appeared to
be both Larger and differently built to any we have seen upon the Coast.
At 6 we were nearly the length of the North end of the Passage; the North
Westermost point of the Main in sight bore North 54 degrees West, and the
North end of the Island North-North-East, having an open Sea between
these 2 points. [This passage I have named Whitsundays Passage, as it was
discover'd on the day the Church commemorates that Festival, and the
Isles which form it Cumberland Isles, in honour of His Royal Highness the
Duke of Cumberland.* (* Henry Frederick, Duke of Cumberland, was a
younger brother of George III.)] We keept under an Easey Sail and the
Lead going all Night, having 21, 22, and 23 fathoms, at the distance of 3
Leagues from the land. At daylight A.M. we were abreast of the point
above mentioned, which is a lofty promontory; that I named Cape
Gloucester* (* William Henry, Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh, a younger
brother of George III.) (Latitude 19 degrees 57 minutes South, Longitude
211 degrees 54 minutes West). It may be known by an Island which lies out
at Sea North by West 1/2 West, 5 or 6 Leagues from it; this I called
Holbourn Isle.* (* Admiral Francis Holbourne commanded the fleet in North
America in which Cook served in 1757.) There are also Islands laying
under the Land between it and Whitsundays Passage. On the West side of
the Cape the Land Trends away South-West and South-South-West, and forms
a deep bay. The Sand in the bottom of this bay I could but just see from
the Masthead; it is very low, and is a Continuation of the same low land
as is at the bottom of Repulse Bay. Without Waiting to look into this
bay, which I called Edgcumbe Bay,* (* In Port Denison, on the western
side of Edgcumbe Bay, is the rising town of Bowen, the port of an
agricultural district. There is good coal in the vicinity. Captain G.
Edgcumbe commanded the Lancaster in the fleet in North America in 1758 in
which Cook served. Afterwards Earl of Mount Edgcumbe.) we continued our
Course to the Westward for the Westermost land we had in sight which bore
from us West by North 1/2 North, and appeared very high. At Noon we were
about 3 Leagues from the Land, and by observation in the Latitude of 19
degrees 47 minutes South, Cape Gloucester bearing South 63 degrees East,
distant 7 1/2 Leagues.

Tuesday, 5th. Winds between the South and East, a Gentle breeze, and
Serene weather. At 6 a.m. we were abreast of the Western point of Land
above mentioned, distant from it 3 Miles, which I have named Cape
Upstart, because being surrounded with low land it starts or rises up
singley at the first making of it (Latitude 19 degrees 39 minutes South,
Longitude 212 degrees 32 minutes West); it lies West-North-West 14
Leagues from Cape Gloucester, and is of a height sufficient to be seen 12
Leagues; but it is not so much of a Promontory as it appears to be,
because on each side of it near the Sea is very low land, which is not to
be seen unless you are pretty well in with the Shore. Inland are some
Tolerable high hills or mountains, which, like the Cape, affords but a
very barren prospect. Having past this Cape, we continued standing to the
West-North-West as the land lay, under an easey Sail, having from 16 to
10 fathoms, until 2 o'Clock a.m., when we fell into 7 fathoms, upon which
we hauled our wind to the Northward, judging ourselves to be very near
the land; as so we found, for at daylight we were little more than 2
Leagues off. What deceived us was the Lowness of the land, which is but
very little higher than the Surface of the Sea, but in the Country were
some hills. At noon we were in 15 fathoms Water, and about 4 Leagues from
the land. Our Latitude by Observation was 19 degrees 12 minutes South;
Cape Upstart bore 38 degrees 30 minutes East, distant 12 Leagues. Course
and distance sail'd since Yesterday noon North 48 degrees 45 minutes, 53
Miles. At and before Noon some very large smokes were Seen rise up out of
the low land. At sun rise I found the Variation to be 5 degrees 35
minutes Easterly; at sun set last night the same Needle gave near 9
degrees. This being Close under Cape Upstart, I judged that it was owing
to Iron ore or other Magnetical Matter Lodged in the Earth.

[Off Cleveland Bay, Queensland.]

Wednesday, 6th. Light Airs at East-South-East, with which we Steer'd
West-North-West as the Land now lay; Depth of Water 12 and 14 fathoms. At
Noon we were by Observation in the Latitude of 19 degrees 1 minute South,
Longitude made from Cape Gloucester 1 degree 30 minutes West; Course and
distance saild since Yesterday noon West-North-West, 28 Miles. In this
situation we had the Mouth of a Bay all open extending from South 1/2
East to South-West 1/2 South, distance 2 Leagues. This bay, which I named
Cleveland Bay,* (* In Cleveland Bay is Townsville, the largest town in
Northern Queensland. Population 12,000.) appeared to be about 5 or 6
Miles in Extent every way. The East point I named Cape Cleveland, and the
West, Magnetical Head or Island, as it had much the appearance of an
Island; and the Compass did not traverse well when near it. They are both
Tolerable high, and so is the Main Land within them, and the whole
appeared to have the most rugged, rocky, and barren Surface of any we
have yet seen. However, it is not without inhabitants, as we saw smoke in
several places in the bottom of the bay. The Northermost land we had in
sight at this time bore North-West; this we took to be an Island or
Islands, for we could not trace the Main land farther than West by North.

Thursday, 7th. Light Airs between the South and East, with which we
steer'd West-North-West, keeping the Main land on board, the outermost
part of which at sun set bore from us West by North; but without this lay
high land, which we took to be Islands. At daylight A.M. we were the
Length of the Eastern part of this Land, which we found to Consist of a
Group of Islands* (* Palm Islands.) laying about 5 Leagues from the Main.
We being at this time between the 2, we continued advancing Slowly to the
North-West until noon, at which time we were by observation in the
Latitude of 18 degrees 49 minutes, and about 5 Leagues from the Main
land, the North-West part of which bore from us North by West 1/2 West,
the Island extending from North to East; distance of the nearest 2 Miles.
Cape Cleveland bore South 50 degrees East, distant 18 Leagues. Our
Soundings in the Course of this day's Sail were from 14 to 11 fathoms.

Friday, 8th. Winds at South-South-East and South; first part light Airs,
the remainder a Gentle breeze. In the P.M. we saw several large smokes
upon the Main, some people, Canoes, and, as we thought, Cocoa Nut Trees
upon one of the Islands; and, as a few of these Nutts would have been
very acceptable to us at this Time, I sent Lieutenant Hicks ashore, with
whom went Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, to see what was to be got. In the
Meantime we keept Standing in for the Island with the Ship. At 7 they
returned on board, having met with Nothing worth Observing. The Trees we
saw were a small kind of Cabbage Palms. They heard some of the Natives as
they were putting off from the Shore, but saw none. After the Boat was
hoisted in we stood away North by West for the Northermost land we had in
sight, which we were abreast of at 3 o'Clock in the Morning, having
passed all the Islands 3 or 4 hours before. This point I have named Point
Hillock,* (* Point Hillock is the east point of Hinchinbrook Island,
which is separated from the main by a narrow and tortuous channel.) on
account of its Figure. The Land of this point is Tolerable high, and may
be known by a round Hillock or rock that appears to be detached from the
point, but I believe it joins to it. Between this Cape and Cape Cleveland
the shore forms a Large bay, which I named Hallifax bay;* (* The Earl of
Halifax was Secretary of State 1763 to 1765.) before it lay the Groups of
Islands before mentioned, and some others nearer the Shore. These Islands
shelter the Bay in a manner from all Winds, in which is good Anchorage.
The land near the Shore in the bottom of the bay is very low and Woody;
but a little way back in the Country is a continued ridge of high land,
which appear'd to be barren and rocky. Having passed Point Hillock, we
continued standing to the North-North-West as the land Trended, having
the Advantage of a light Moon. At 6 a.m. we were abreast of a point of
Land which lies North by West 1/2 West, 11 Miles from Point Hillick; the
Land between them is very high, and of a craggy, barren surface. This
point I named Cape Sandwich;* (* Earl of Sandwich was First Lord of the
Admiralty 1763.) it may not only be known by the high, craggy land over
it, but by a small Island which lies East one Mile from it, and some
others about 2 Leagues to the Northward of it. From Cape Sandwich the
Land trends West, and afterwards North, and forms a fine, Large Bay,
which I called Rockingham Bay;* (* The Marquis of Rockingham was Prime
Minister 1765 to 1766.) it is well Shelter'd, and affords good Anchorage;
at least, so it appear'd to me, for having met with so little
encouragement by going ashore that I would not wait to land or examine it
farther, but continued to range along Shore to the Northward for a parcel
of Small Islands* (* The Family Islands.) laying off the Northern point
of the Bay, and, finding a Channel of a Mile broad between the 3
Outermost and those nearer the Shore, we pushed thro'. While we did this
we saw on one of the nearest Islands a Number of the Natives collected
together, who seem'd to look very attentively upon the Ship; they were
quite naked, and of a very Dark Colour, with short hair. At noon we were
by observation in the Latitude of 17 degrees 59 minutes, and abreast of
the North point of Rockingham Bay, which bore from us West 2 Miles. This
boundry of the Bay is form'd by a Tolerable high Island, known in the
Chart by the Name of Dunk Isle; it lays so near the Shore as not to be
distinguished from it unless you are well in with the Land. At this time
we were in the Longitude of 213 degrees 57 minutes. Cape Sandwich bore
South by East 1/2 East, distant 19 Miles, and the northermost land in
sight North 1/2 West. Our depth of Water in the Course of this day's Sail
was not more than 16, nor less than 7, fathoms.* (* About here the Great
Barrier Reefs begin to close in on the land. Cook kept so close to the
latter that he was unconscious as yet of their existence; but he was soon
to find them.)

[Anchored near Cape Grafton, Queensland.]

Saturday, 9th. Winds between the South and South-East, a Gentle breeze,
and Clear weather, with which we steer'd North by West as the land lay,
the northern extream of which at sunset bore North 25 degrees West. We
keept on our Course under an Easey sail all night, having from 12 to 16
fathoms, at the distance of about 3 or 4 Leagues from the Land. At 6 a.m.
we were abreast of Some small Islands, which we called Frankland Isles,
that lay about 2 Leagues from the Mainland, the Northern Point of which
in sight bore North by West 1/2 West; but this we afterwards found to be
an Island,* (* Fitzroy Island.) tolerable high, and about 4 Miles in
Circuit. It lies about 2 Miles from the Point on the Main between which
we went with the ship, and were in the Middle of the Channell at Noon,
and by observation in the Latitude of 16 degrees 55 minutes, where we had
20 fathoms of water. The point of land we were now abreast of I called
Cape Grafton* (* The Duke of Grafton was Prime Minister when Cook
sailed.) (Latitude 16 degrees 55 minutes South, Longitude 214 degrees 11
minutes West); it is Tolerable high, and so is the whole Coast for 20
Leagues to the southward, and hath a very rocky surface, which is thinly
cover'd with wood. In the night we saw several fires along shore, and a
little before noon some people.

Sunday, 10th. After hauling round Cape Grafton we found the land trend
away North-West by West; 3 Miles to the Westward of the Cape is a Bay,
wherein we Anchor'd, about 2 Miles from the Shore, in 4 fathoms, owsey
bottom. The East point of the Bay bore South 74 degrees East, the West
point South 83 degrees West, and a Low green woody Island laying in the
Offing bore North 35 degrees East. The Island lies North by East 1/2
East, distance 3 or 4 Leagues from Cape Grafton, and is known in the
Chart by the Name of Green Island. As soon as the Ship was brought to an
Anchor I went ashore, accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander; the
first thing I did was to look for fresh Water, and with that View rowed
out towards the Cape, because in the bottom of the bay was low Mangrove
land, and little probability of meeting with any there. But the way I
went I found 2 Small streams, which were difficult to get at on account
of the Surf and rocks upon the Shore. As we came round the Cape we saw,
in a sandy Cove, a small stream of Water run over the beach; but here I
did not go in the boat because I found that it would not be Easey to
land. We hardly advanced anything into the Country, it being here hilly,
which were steep and rocky, and we had not time to Visit the Low lands,
and therefore met with nothing remarkable. My intention was to have
stay'd here at least one day, to have looked into the Country had we met
with fresh water convenient, or any other Refreshment; but as we did not,
I thought it would be only spending of time, and loosing as much of a
light Moon to little purpose, and therefore at 12 o'Clock at night we
weighed and stood away to the North-West, having at this time but little
wind, attended with Showers of rain.* (* In the next bay west of where
Cook anchored is Cairns, a small but rising town in the centre of a
sugar-growing district.) At 4 the breeze freshned at South by East, with
fair weather; we continued steering North-North-West 1/2 West as the Land
lay, having 10, 12, and 14 fathoms, at a distance of 3 Leagues from the
Land. At 11 we hauld off North, in order to get without a Small Low
Island* (* Low Isles. There is now a lighthouse on them.) which lay about
2 Leagues from the Main; it being about high Water, about the time we
passed it, great part of it lay under water. About 3 Leagues to the North
Westward of this Island, close under the Main land, is another Island,*
(* Snapper Island.) Tolerable high, which bore from us at Noon North 55
degrees West, distant 7 or 8 Miles; we being at this time in the Latitude
of 16 degrees 20 minutes South, Cape Grafton bore South 29 degrees East,
distant 40 Miles, and the Northermost point of Land in Sight North 20
degrees West, and in this Situation had 15 fathoms Water. The Shore
between Cape Grafton and the above Northern point forms a large but not
very deep Bay, which I named Trinity Bay, after the day on which it was
discover'd; the North point Cape Tribulation, because here began all our
Troubles. Latitude 16 degrees 6 minutes South, Longitude 214 degrees 39
minutes West.

[The Ship Aground on Endeavour Reef.]

Monday, 11th. Wind at East-South-East, with which we steer'd along shore
North by West at the distance of 3 or 4 Leagues off, having from 14 to 10
and 12 fathoms water. Saw 2 Small Islands in the Offing, which lay in the
Latitude of 16 degrees 0 minutes South, and about 6 or 7 Leagues from the
Main. At 6 the Northermost land in sight bore North by West 1/2 West, and
2 low, woody Islands,* (* Hope Islands.) which some took to be rocks
above Water, bore North 1/2 West. At this time we shortened Sail, and
hauld off shore East-North-East and North-East by East, close upon a
Wind. My intention was to stretch off all Night as well to avoid the
danger we saw ahead as to see if any Islands lay in the Offing,
especially as we now begun to draw near the Latitude of those discover'd
by Quiros, which some Geographers, for what reason I know not, have
thought proper to Tack to this land. Having the advantage of a fine
breeze of wind, and a clear Moon light Night in standing off from 6 until
near 9 o Clock, we deepned our Water from 14 to 21 fathoms, when all at
once we fell into 12, 10 and 8 fathoms. At this time I had everybody at
their Stations to put about and come to an Anchor; but in this I was not
so fortunate, for meeting again with Deep Water, I thought there could be
no danger in standing on.* (* The ship passed just northward of
Pickersgill Reef.) Before 10 o'Clock we had 20 and 21 fathoms, and
Continued in that depth until a few minutes before 11, when we had 17,
and before the Man at the Lead could heave another cast, the Ship Struck
and stuck fast. Immediately upon this we took in all our Sails, hoisted
out the Boats and Sounded round the Ship, and found that we had got upon
the South-East Edge of a reef of Coral Rocks, having in some places round
the Ship 3 and 4 fathoms Water, and in other places not quite as many
feet, and about a Ship's length from us on the starboard side (the Ship
laying with her Head to the North-East) were 8, 10, and 12 fathoms. As
soon as the Long boat was out we struck Yards and Topmast, and carried
out the Stream Anchor on our Starboard bow, got the Coasting Anchor and
Cable into the Boat, and were going to carry it out in the same way; but
upon my sounding the 2nd time round the Ship I found the most water a
Stern, and therefore had this Anchor carried out upon the Starboard
Quarter, and hove upon it a very great Strain; which was to no purpose,
the Ship being quite fast, upon which we went to work to lighten her as
fast as possible, which seem'd to be the only means we had left to get
her off. As we went ashore about the Top of High Water we not only
started water, but threw overboard our Guns, Iron and Stone Ballast,
Casks, Hoop Staves, Oil Jarrs, decay'd Stores, etc.; many of these last
Articles lay in the way at coming at Heavier. All this time the Ship made
little or no Water. At 11 a.m., being high Water as we thought, we try'd
to heave her off without Success, she not being afloat by a foot or more,
notwithstanding by this time we had thrown overboard 40 or 50 Tuns
weight. As this was not found sufficient we continued to Lighten her by
every method we could think off; as the Tide fell the ship began to make
Water as much as two pumps could free: at Noon she lay with 3 or 4
Streakes heel to Starboard; Latitude observed 15 degrees 45 minutes
South.

Tuesday, 12th. Fortunately we had little wind, fine weather, and a smooth
Sea, all this 24 Hours, which in the P.M. gave us an Opportunity to carry
out the 2 Bower Anchors, one on the Starboard Quarter, and the other
right a Stern, got Blocks and Tackles upon the Cables, brought the falls
in abaft and hove taught. By this time it was 5 o'Clock p.m.; the tide we
observed now begun to rise, and the leak increased upon us, which obliged
us to set the 3rd Pump to work, as we should have done the 4th also, but
could not make it work. At 9 the Ship righted, and the Leak gain'd upon
the Pumps considerably. This was an alarming and, I may say, terrible
circumstance, and threatened immediate destruction to us. However, I
resolv'd to risque all, and heave her off in case it was practical, and
accordingly turn'd as many hands to the Capstan and Windlass as could be
spared from the Pumps; and about 20 Minutes past 10 o'Clock the Ship
floated, and we hove her into Deep Water, having at this time 3 feet 9
Inches Water in the hold. This done I sent the Long boat to take up the
Stream Anchor, got the Anchor, but lost the Cable among the Rocks; after
this turn'd all hands to the Pumps, the Leak increasing upon us.

A mistake soon after hapned, which for the first time caused fear to
approach upon every man in the Ship. The man that attended the well took
the Depth of water above the Ceiling; he, being relieved by another who
did not know in what manner the former had sounded, took the Depth of
water from the outside plank, the difference being 16 or 18 inches, and
made it appear that the leak had gained this upon the pumps in a short
time. This mistake was no sooner cleared up than it acted upon every man
like a Charm; they redoubled their vigour, insomuch that before 8 o'clock
in the morning they gained considerably upon the leak.* (* The
circumstance related in this paragraph is from the Admiralty copy.) We
now hove up the Best Bower, but found it impossible to save the small
Bower, so cut it away at a whole Cable; got up the Fore topmast and
Foreyard, warped the Ship to the South-East, and at 11 got under sail,
and stood in for the land, with a light breeze at East-South-East. Some
hands employ'd sewing Oakham, Wool, etc., into a Lower Steering sail to
fother the Ship; others employ'd at the Pumps, which still gain'd upon
the Leak.

[Fothering the Ship.]

Wednesday, 13th. In the P.M. had light Airs at East-South-East, with
which we keept edging in for the Land. Got up the Maintopmast and
Mainyard, and having got the Sail ready for fothering of the Ship, we put
it over under the Starboard Fore Chains, where we suspected the Ship had
suffer'd most, and soon after the Leak decreased, so as to be keept clear
with one Pump with ease; this fortunate circumstance gave new life to
every one on board.

It is much easier to conceive than to discribe the satisfaction felt by
everybody on this occasion. But a few minutes before our utmost Wishes
were to get hold of some place upon the Main, or an island, to run the
Ship ashore, where out of her Materials we might build a Vessel to carry
us to the East Indies; no sooner were we made sencible that the outward
application to the Ship's bottom had taken effect, than the field of
every Man's hopes inlarged, so that we thought of nothing but ranging
along Shore in search of a Harbour, when we could repair the Damages we
had sustained.* (* The foregoing paragraph is from the Admiralty copy.
The situation was indeed sufficiently awkward. When it is considered that
the coast was wholly unknown, the natives decidedly hostile, the land
unproductive of any means of subsistence, and the distance to the nearest
Dutch settlements, even if a passage should be found south of New Guinea,
1500 miles, there was ample cause for apprehension if they could not save
the ship. Knowing what we now know, that all off this coast is a
continuous line of reefs and shoals, Cook's action in standing off might
seem rash. But he knew nothing of this. There was a moon; he reduced sail
to double reefed topsails with a light wind, as the log tells us, and
with the cumbrous hempen cables of the day, and the imperfect means of
heaving up the anchor, he was desirous of saving his men unnecessary
labour. Cook was puzzled that the next tide did not, after lightening the
ship, take him off; but it is now known that on this coast it is only
every alternate tide that rises to a full height, and as he got ashore
nearly at the top of the higher of the two waters he had to wait
twenty-four hours until he got a similar rise. Lucky was it for them that
the wind was light. Usually at this season the trade wind is strong, and
raises a considerable sea, even inside the Barrier. Hawkesworth or Banks
makes the proposition to fother the ship emanate from Mr. Monkhouse; but
it is scarcely to be supposed that such a perfect seaman as Cook was not
familiar with this operation, and he merely says that as Mr. Monkhouse
had seen it done, he confided to him the superintendence of it, as of
course the Captain had at such a time many other things to do than stand
over the men preparing the sail. In 1886 the people of Cooktown were
anxious to recover the brass guns of the Endeavour which were thrown
overboard, in order to place them as a memento in their town; but they
could not be found, which is not altogether surprising.) In justice to
the Ship's Company, I must say that no men ever behaved better than they
have done on this occasion; animated by the behaviour of every Gentleman
on board, every man seem'd to have a just sence of the Danger we were in,
and exerted himself to the very utmost. The Ledge of Rocks, or Shoal, we
have been upon, lies in the Latitude of 15 degrees 45 minutes, and about
6 or 7 Leagues from the Main land; but this is not the only Shoal that
lay upon this part of the Coast, especially to the Northward, and one
which we saw to the Southward, the tail of which we passed over when we
had the uneven Soundings 2 hours before we Struck. A part of this Shoal
is always above Water, and looks to be white Sand; part of the one we
were upon was dry at low Water, and in that place consists of Sand and
stones, but every where else Coral Rocks. At 6 we Anchored in 17 fathoms,
about 5 or 6 Leagues from the land, and one from the Shoal. At this time
the Ship made about 15 Inches Water per hour. At 6 a.m. weigh'd and stood
to the North-West, edging in for the land, having a Gentle breeze at
South-South-East. At 9 we past close without 2 small low Islands, laying
in the Latitude of 15 degrees 41 minutes, and about 4 Leagues from the
Main; I have named them Hope Islands, because we were always in hopes of
being able to reach these Islands. At Noon we were about 3 Leagues from
the Land, and in the Latitude of 15 degrees 37 minutes South; the
Northermost part of the Main in sight bore North 30 degrees West, and the
above Islands extending from South 30 degrees East to South 40 degrees
East. In this situation had 12 fathoms water and several sandbanks
without us. The Leak now decreaseth, but for fear it should break out
again we got the Sail ready fill'd for fothering; the manner this is done
is thus: We Mix Oacham and Wool together (but Oacham alone would do), and
chop it up Small, and then stick it loosely by handfulls all over the
Sail, and throw over it Sheep dung or other filth. Horse Dung for this
purpose is the best. The Sail thus prepared is hauld under the Ship's
bottom by ropes, and if the place of the Leak is uncertain, it must be
hauld from one part of her bottom to another until one finds the place
where it takes effect. While the Sail is under the Ship the Oacham, etc.,
is washed off, and part of it carried along with the water into the Leak,
and in part stops up the hole. Mr. Monkhouse, one of my Midshipmen, was
once in a Merchant Ship which Sprung a Leak, and made 48 Inches Water per
hour; but by this means was brought home from Virginia to London with
only her proper crew; to him I gave the direction of this, who executed
it very much to my satisfaction.

[In Endeavour River, Queensland.]

Thursday, 14th. P.M., had a Gentle breeze at South-East by East. Sent the
Master, with 2 Boats as well, to sound ahead of the Ship, as to look out
for a Harbour where we could repair our defects, and put the Ship on a
proper Trim, both of which she now very much wanted. At 3 saw an Opening
that had the appearance of a Harbour; stood off and on while the Boats
were examining it, who found that there was not a sufficient depth of
Water for the Ship. By this time it was almost sun set, and seeing many
shoals about us we Anchored in 4 fathoms about 2 miles from the Shore,
the Main land extending from North 1/2 East to South by East 1/2 East. At
8 o'clock the Pinnace, in which was one of the Mates, return'd on board,
and reported that they had found a good Harbour* (* Cook Harbour,
Endeavour River.) about 2 Leagues to leeward. In consequence of this
information we, at 6 a.m., weigh'd and run down to it, first sending 2
Boats ahead to lay upon the Shoals that lay in our way; and
notwithstanding this precaution, we were once in 3 fathoms with the Ship.
Having pass'd these Shoals, the Boats were sent to lay in the Channell
leading into the Harbour. By this time it begun to blow in so much that
the Ship would not work, having missed stays Twice; and being entangled
among Shoals, I was afraid of being drove to Leeward before the Boats
could place themselves, and therefore Anchoredd in 4 fathoms about a Mile
from the Shore, and then made the Signal for the Boats to come on board,
after which I went myself and Buoy'd the Channell, which I found very
narrow, and the Harbour much smaller than I had been told, but very
convenient for our Purpose. At Noon Latitude observed 15 degrees 26
minutes South. [Note. This day I restor'd Mr. Magra to his Duty, as I did
not find him guilty of the crimes laid to his charge.]

Friday, 15th. A fresh Gale at South-East and Cloudy weather, attended
with Showers of Rain. In the Night, as it blow'd too fresh to break the
Ship loose to run into the Harbour, we got down the Topgallant yards,
unbent the Mainsail, and some of the Small sails; got down the
Foretopgallant mast, and the Jibb Boom and Spritsailyard in, intending to
lighten the Ship Forward as much as possible, in order to lay her ashore
to come at the Leak.

Saturday, 16th. Strong Gales at South-East, and Cloudy, hazey weather,
with Showers of Rain. At 6 o'Clock in the A.M. it moderated a little, and
we hove short, intending to get under sail, but was obliged to desist,
and veer away again; some people were seen ashore to-day.

Sunday, 17th. Most part strong Gales at South-East, with some heavy
showers of rain in the P.M. At 6 a.m., being pretty moderate, we weigh'd
and run into the Harbour, in doing of which we run the Ship ashore Twice.
The first time she went off without much Trouble, but the Second time she
Stuck fast; but this was of no consequence any farther than giving us a
little trouble, and was no more than what I expected as we had the wind.
While the Ship lay fast we got down the Foreyard, Foretopmast, booms,
etc., overboard, and made a raft of them alongside.

Monday, 18th. Fresh Gales and Cloudy, with Showers of Rain. At 1 p.m. the
Ship floated, and we warped her into the Harbour, and moor'd her
alongside of a Steep Beach on the South side; got the Anchors, Cables,
and all the Hawsers ashore. In the A.M. made a Stage from the Ship to the
Shore, Erected 2 Tents, one for the Sick, and the other for the Stores
and Provisions; Landed all the empty Casks and part of the Provisions,
and sent a boat to haul the Sean, which return'd without Success.

Tuesday, 19th. Fresh Gales at South-East and Cloudy weather, with
frequent showers of Rain. P.M., landed all the Provisions and Part of the
Stores; got the Sick ashore, which amounted, at this time, to 8 or 9,
afflicted with different disorders, but none very dangerously ill. This
afternoon I went upon one of the highest Hills over the Harbour, from
which I had a perfect View of the inlet or River, and adjacent country,
which afforded but a very indifferent prospect. The Low lands near the
River is all over run with Mangroves, among which the salt water flows
every tide, and the high land appear'd to be barren and Stoney. A.M., got
the 4 remaining Guns out of the hold, and mounted them on the Quarter
Deck; got a spare Anchor and Stock ashore, and the remaining part of the
Stores and ballast that were in the Hold; set up the Forge, and set the
Armourer and his Mate to work to make Nails, etc., to repair the Ship.

Wednesday, 20th. Winds at South-East, a fresh breeze, Fore and Middle
parts rainy, the Latter fair. This day got out all the Officers' stores
and the ground Tier of Water, having now nothing in the Fore and Main
Hold But the Coals and a little Stone ballast.

Thursday, 21st. P.M., landed the Powder, got out the stone ballast, wood,
etc., which brought the Ship's Draught of water to 8 feet 10 inches
Forward, and 13 feet abaft. This I thought, by trimming the Coals aft,
would be sufficient, as I find the Tides will rise and fall upon a
Perpendicular 8 feet at Spring tides; but after the Coals was trimm'd
away from over the Leak we Could hear the Water come Gushing in a little
abaft the Foremast about 3 feet from her Keel. This determin'd me to
clear the hold intirely; accordingly very early in the Morning we went to
work to get out the Coals, which was Employment for all hands.

[Ship Beached in Endeavour River.]

Friday, 22nd. Winds at South-East, fair weather. At 4 p.m., having got
out most of the Coals, cast loose the Ship's moorings, and warped her a
little higher up the Harbour to a place I had pitched upon to lay her
ashore to stop the Leak; draught of water Forward 7 feet 9 inches and
abaft 13 feet 6 inches. At 8, being high water, hauld her bow close
ashore, but Keept her stern afloat, because I was afraid of Neaping her,*
(* I.e., Having her so far on shore that they could not heave her off at
Neap tide.) and yet it was necessary to lay the whole of her as near the
ground as possible.* (* The town of Cooktown now stands where the
Endeavour was beached, and the (as near as can be judged) exact spot is
marked by a monument.) At 2 a.m. the Tide left her, which gave us an
Opportunity to Examine the Leak, which we found to be at her Floor Heads,
a little before the Starboard Fore Chains; here the Rocks had made their
way thro' 4 planks, quite to, and even into the Timbers, and wounded 3
more. The manner these planks were damaged--or cut out, as I may say--is
hardly credible; scarce a Splinter was to be seen, but the whole was cut
away as if it had been done by the Hands of Man with a blunt-edge Tool.
Fortunately for us the Timbers in this place were very close; other wise
it would have been impossible to have saved the Ship, and even as it was
it appeared very extraordinary that she made no more water than what she
did. A large peice of Coral rock was sticking in one Hole, and several
peices of the Fothering, small stones, etc., had made its way in, and
lodged between the Timbers, which had stopped the Water from forcing its
way in in great Quantities. Part of the Sheathing was gone from under the
Larboard bow, part of the False Kiel was gone, and the remainder in such
a Shatter'd Condition that we should be much better off if it was gone
also; her Forefoot and some part of her Main Kiel was also damaged, but
not Materially. What damage she may have received abaft we could not see,
but believe not much, as the Ship makes but little water, while the Tide
Keeps below the Leak forward. At 9 the Carpenters went to work upon the
Ship, while the Armourers were buisy making Bolts, Nails, etc.

Saturday, 23rd. Winds South Easterly, a fresh Gale and fair weather.
Carpenters employed Shifting the Damaged planks as long as the tide would
permit them to work. At low water P.M. we examined the Ship's bottom
under the Starboard side, she being dry as far aft as the After-part of
the Fore Chains; we could not find that she had received any other damage
on this side but what has been mentioned. In the morning I sent 3 Men
into the Country to shoot Pidgeons, as some of these birds had been seen
flying about; in the evening they return'd with about 1/2 a Dozen. One of
the Men saw an Animal something less than a greyhound; it was of a Mouse
Colour, very slender made, and swift of Foot.* (* Kangaroo.) A.M., I sent
a Boat to haul the Sean, who return'd at noon, having made 3 Hauls and
caught only 3 fish; and yet we see them in plenty Jumping about the
harbour, but can find no method of catching them.

Sunday, 24th. Winds and weather as Yesterday. P.M., the Carpenters
finished the Starboard side, and at 9 heeld the Ship the other way, and
hauld her off about 2 feet for fear of Neaping. In the A.M. they went to
work repairing the Sheathing under the Larboard bow, where we found 2
planks cut about half thro'. Early in the morning I sent a party of Men
into the Country under the direction of Lieutenant Gore to seek for
refreshments; they return'd about noon with a few Palm Cabbages and a
Bunch or 2 of wild Plantains; these last were much Smaller than any I had
ever seen, and the Pulp full of small Stones; otherwise they were well
tasted. I saw myself this morning, a little way from the Ship, one of the
Animals before spoke off; it was of a light mouse Colour and the full
size of a Grey Hound, and shaped in every respect like one, with a long
tail, which it carried like a Grey hound; in short, I should have taken
it for a wild dog but for its walking or running, in which it jump'd like
a Hare or Deer. Another of them was seen to-day by some of our people,
who saw the first; they described them as having very small Legs, and the
print of the Feet like that of a Goat; but this I could not see myself
because the ground the one I saw was upon was too hard, and the length of
the Grass hindered my seeing its legs.* (* These kangaroos were the first
seen by Europeans. The name was obtained from the natives by Mr. Banks.)

Monday, 25th. At low water in the P.M. While the Carpenters were buisey
in repairing the Sheathing and plank under the Larboard bow I got people
to go under the Ship's bottom, to examine all her Larboard side, she only
being dry Forward, but abaft were 9 feet water. They found part of the
Sheathing off abreast of the Mainmast about her floor heads, and a part
of one plank a little damaged. There were 3 people who went down, who all
agreed in the same Story; the Master was one, who was positive that she
had received no Material Damage besides the loss of the Sheathing. This
alone will be sufficient to let the worm into her bottom, which may prove
of bad consequence. However, we must run all risque, for I know of no
method to remedy this but by heaving her down, which would be a work of
Emence Labour and time, if not impractical in our present situation.

The Carpenters continued hard at work under her bottom until put off by
the Tide in the evening, and the morning Tide did not Ebb out far enough
to permit them to work upon her, for here we have only one Tolerable low
and high tide in 24 Hours. A.M., a party of Men were employ'd ashore
filling water, while others were employ'd overhauling the rigging.

Tuesday, 26th. Fair weather, a South-East wind, and a fresh Gale; at low
Water P.M. the Carpenters finished under the Larboard bow and every other
place the tide would permit them to come at. Lashed some Casks under the
Ship's bows in order to help to float her, and at high water in the Night
attempted to heave her off, but could not, she not being afloat partly
owing to some of the Casks not holding that were Lashed under her. A.M.,
employed getting more Casks ready for the same purpose; but I am much
afraid that we shall not be able to float her now the Tides are Taking
off.

Wednesday, 27th. A fresh breeze of Wind at South-East and Cloudy weather.
P.M., lashed 38 empty Butts under the Ship's Bottom in order to float her
off, which proved ineffectual, and therefore gave over all hopes of
getting her off until the Next spring tides. At daylight we got a
Considerable weight of sundry Articles from Aft forward to ease the Ship;
the Armourer at work at the Forge repairing Iron work, etc., Carpenters
caulking and Stocking one of the Spare Anchors, Seamen employ'd filling
of Water and overhauling the rigging, and I went in the pinnace up the
Harbour, and made several hauls with the Sean, but caught only between 20
and 30 pound of fish, which were given to the sick and such as were weak
and Ailing.

Thursday, 28th. Fresh breezes and Cloudy. All hands employ'd as
Yesterday.

Friday, 29th. Wind and weather as Yesterday, and the employment of the
People the same, Lieutenant Gore having been 4 or 5 miles in the Country,
where he met with nothing remarkable. He saw the footsteps of Men, and
likewise those of 3 or 4 sorts of wild beasts, but saw neither Man nor
beast. Some others of our people who were out Yesterday on the North side
of the River met with a place where the Natives have just been, as their
fires was then burning; but they saw nobody, nor have we seen one since
we have been in port. In these excursions we found some Wild Yamms or
Cocos growing in the Swampy grounds, and this Afternoon I sent a Party of
Men to gather some. The Tops we found made good greens, and eat
exceedingly well when Boil'd, but the roots were so bad that few besides
myself could eat them. This night Mr. Green and I observ'd an Emersion of
Jupiter's first Satellite, which hapned at 2 hours 58 minutes 53 seconds
in the A.M.; the same Emersion hapnd at Greenwich, according to
Calculation, on the 30th at 5 hours 17 minutes 43 seconds A.M. The
differance is 14 hours 18 minutes 50 seconds, equal to 214 degrees 42
minutes 30 seconds of Longitude,* (* This was an excellent observation.
The true longitude is 214 degrees 45 minutes.) which this place is West
of Greenwich, and its Latitude 15 degrees 26 minutes South. A.M., I sent
some hands in a Boat up the River to haul the Sean, while the rest were
employ'd about the rigging and sundry other Dutys.

Saturday, 30th. Moderate breezes at South-East, and clear serene weather.
P.M., the Boat returned from hauling the Sean, having caught as much fish
as came to a pound and a half a Man. A.M., I sent her again to haul the
Sean, and some hands to gather greens, while others were employ'd about
the rigging, etc., etc. I likewise sent some of the Young Gentlemen to
take a plan of the Harbour, and went myself upon the hill, which is near
the South point to take a view of the Sea.* (* Grassy Hill.) At this time
it was low water, and I saw what gave me no small uneasiness, which were
a Number of Sand Banks and Shoals laying all along the Coast; the
innermost lay about 3 or 4 Miles from the Shore, and the outermost
extended off to Sea as far as I could see without my glass, some just
appeared above water.* (* These were the innermost reefs of the Great
Barrier. There is a tolerably clear passage about 8 miles wide between
them and the shore, though this has some small shoals in it.) The only
hopes I have of getting clear of them is to the Northward, where there
seems to be a Passage, for as the wind blows constantly from the
South-East we shall find it difficult, if not impractical, to return to
the Southward.

[July 1770.]

Sunday, 1st July. Gentle breezes at South-East, and Cloudy weather, with
some Gentle Showers in the morning. P.M., the People return'd from
hauling the Sean, having caught as much fish as came to 2 1/2 pound per
Man, no one on board having more than another. The few Greens we got I
caused to be boil'd among the pease, and makes a very good Mess, which,
together with the fish, is a great refreshment to the people. A.M., a
party of Men, one from each Mess, went again a fishing, and all the rest
I gave leave to go into the Country, knowing that there was no danger
from the Natives. To-day at Noon the Thermometer in the Shade rose to 87
degrees, which is 2 or 3 Degrees higher than it hath been on any day
before in this place.

Monday, 2nd. Ditto weather. P.M., the fishing-party caught as much fish
as came to 2 pounds a Man. Those that were in the Country met with
nothing New. Early in the A.M. I sent the Master in the pinnace out of
the Harbour, to sound about the Shoals in the Offing and to look for a
Channel to the Northward. At this time we had a breeze of wind from the
land, which continued till about 9. What makes me mention this is, that
it is the first Land breeze we have had since we have been in this River.
At low water lashed empty Casks under the Ship's bows, being in some
hopes of floating her the next high Water, and sent some hands a fishing,
while others were employ'd in refitting the Ship.

Tuesday, 3rd. Winds at South-East, Fore and Middle part gentle breeze,
the remainder a fresh gale. In the evening the fishing Party return'd,
having got as much fish as came to 2 pounds a Man. At high water we
attempted to heave the Ship off, but did not succeed. At Noon the Master
return'd, and reported he had found a passage out to Sea between the
Shoals, which passage lies out East-North-East or East by North from the
River mouth. He found these Shoals to Consist of Coral Rocks; he landed
upon one, which drys at low Water, where he found very large cockles* (*
Tridacna.) and a Variety of other Shell fish, a quantity of which he
brought away with him. He told me that he was 5 Leagues out at Sea,
having at that distance 21 fathoms water, and judg'd himself to be
without all the Shoals, which I very much doubted.* (* Cook was right.
The shoals extend for four leagues farther.) After this he came in Shore,
and Stood to the Northward, where he met with a Number of Shoals laying a
little distance from the Shore. About 9 in the evening he landed in a Bay
about 3 Leagues to the Northward of this Place, where he disturbed some
of the Natives, whom he supposed to be at supper; they all fled upon his
approach, and Left him some fresh Sea Eggs, and a fire ready lighted
behind them; but there was neither House nor Hut near. Although these
Shoals lay within sight of the Coast, and abound very much with Shell
fish and other small fish, which are to be caught at Low water in holes
in the Rocks, yet the Natives never visit them, for if they did we must
have seen of these Large shells on shore about their  fire places. The
reason I do suppose is, that they have no Boats that they dare Venture so
far out at Sea in.* (* Nevertheless the natives do get out to the islands
which lie farther from the shore than these reefs, as Cook himself
afterwards found.)

Wednesday, 4th. Strong gales at South-East and fair weather. P.M., the
fishing party return'd with the usual success; at High water hove the
ship Afloat. A.M., employ'd trimming her upon an even Kiel, intending to
lay her ashore once more, to come at her bottom under the Larboard Main
Chains.

Thursday, 5th. Strong breezes at South-East and fair weather. P.M. Warped
the Ship over, and at high Water laid her ashore on the Sandbank on the
South side of the River, for I was afraid to lay her broad side to the
Shore where she lay before, because the ground lies upon too great a
decent, and she hath already received some Damage by laying there these
last Niep Tides, at least she still makes water.

[At Anchor, Endeavour River.]

Friday, 6th. Ditto weather. At low water in the P.M. had hardly 4 feet
water under the Ship; yet could not repair the Sheathing that was beat
off, the place being all under water. One of the Carpenter's crew, a Man
I could trust, went down and Examin'd it, and found 3 Streakes of the
Sheathing gone about 7 or 8 feet long, and the Main Plank a little
rubbed; this account agrees with the report of the Master and others that
were under her bottom before. The Carpenter, who I look upon to be well
skill'd in his profession, and a good judge in these matters, was of
Opinion that this was of little consequence; and as I found that it would
be difficult, if not impractical, for us to get under her bottom to
repair it, I resolved to spend no more time about it. Accordingly at high
water hove her off, and moor'd her alongside the beach, where the Stores,
etc., lay, and in the A.M. got everything in readiness for taking them on
board, and at the same time got on board 8 Tuns of Water, and stow'd in
the ground Tier in the after Hold. In the Morning Mr. Banks and
Lieutenant Gore with 3 Men went in a small Boat up the Harbour, with a
View to stay 2 or 3 days to try to Kill some of the Animals we have seen
about this place.

Saturday, 7th. Fresh breezes at South-East and fair weather. Employ'd
getting on board Coals, Ballast, etc., and caulking the Ship; a work that
could not be done while she lay aground. The Armourer and his Mate are
Still employ'd at the Forge making and repairing sundry Articles in the
Iron way.

Sunday, 8th. Gentle breeze and South-East, and clear weather. Early I
sent the Master in a Boat out to Sea to sound again about the Shoals,
because the account he had given of the Channell before mentioned was to
me by no means Satisfactory; likewise sent some hands to haul the Sean,
who caught near 80 pounds of fish; the rest of the people I gave leave to
go into the Country.

Monday, 9th. In the Day Ditto Winds, but in the night Calm. P.M., Mr.
Gore and Mr. Banks return'd, having met with nothing remarkable; they
were about 3 or 4 Leagues up in the Country without finding hardly any
Variation either in the Soil or Produce. In the Evening the Master
return'd, having been several Leagues out at Sea, and at that Distance
off saw Shoals without him, and was of opinion there was no getting out
to Sea that way. In his return he touched upon one of the Shoals, the
same as he was upon the first time he was out; he here saw a great number
of Turtle, 3 of which he Caught weighing 791 pounds. This occasion'd my
sending him out again this morning provided with proper gear for Striking
them, he having before nothing but a Boat Hook. Carpenters, Smiths, and
Coopers at their respective Employments, and the Seamen employed getting
on board stones, ballast, etc. This day all hands feasted upon Turtle for
the First time.* (* As they had had nothing fresh but a little fish for
four months, and scarcely any meat since they left the Society Islands,
eleven months before, we can imagine that this was a feast.)

Tuesday, 10th. Winds and weather as yesterday. Employ'd hoisting on board
and stowing away the ground Tier of Water. P.M., saw 7 or 8 of the
Natives on the South side of the River, and 2 of them came down upon the
Sandy point opposite the Ship; but as soon as I put off in a Boat in
order to speak with them they run away as fast as they could. At 11 Mr.
Banks, who had gone out to Sea with Mr. Molineux, the Master, return'd in
his own Small Boat, and gave but a Very bad account of our
Turtlecatchers. At the time he left them, which was about 6 o'Clock, they
had not got one, nor were they likely to get any; and yet the Master was
so obstinate that he would not return,* (* This seems rather hard upon
the Master.) which obliged me to send Mr. Gore out in the Yawl this
morning to order the Boat and People in, in Case they could not be
employ'd there to some Advantage. In the A.M. 4 of the Natives came down
to the Sandy point on the North side of the Harbour, having along with
them a small wooden Canoe with Outriggers, in which they seem'd to be
employed striking fish, etc. Some were for going over in a Boat to them;
but this I would not suffer, but let them alone without seeming to take
any Notice of them. At length 2 of them came in the Canoe so near the
Ship as to take some things we throw'd them. After this they went away,
and brought over the other 2, and came again alongside, nearer than they
had done before, and took such Trifles as we gave them; after this they
landed close to the Ship, and all 4 went ashore, carrying their Arms with
them. But Tupia soon prevailed upon them to lay down their Arms, and come
and set down by him, after which most of us went to them, made them again
some presents, and stay'd by them until dinner time, when we made them
understand that we were going to eat, and asked them by signals to go
with us; but this they declined, and as soon as we left them they went
away in their Canoe. One of these Men was something above the Middle Age,
the other 3 were young; none of them were above 5 1/2 feet high, and all
their Limbs proportionately small. They were wholy naked, their Skins the
Colour of Wood soot, and this seem'd to be their Natural Colour. Their
Hair was black, lank, and cropt short, and neither wooly nor Frizled; nor
did they want any of their Fore Teeth, as Dampier has mentioned those did
he saw on the Western side of this Country. Some part of their Bodys had
been painted with red, and one of them had his upper lip and breast
painted with Streakes of white, which he called Carbanda. Their features
were far from being disagreeable; their Voices were soft and Tunable, and
they could easily repeat any word after us, but neither us nor Tupia
could understand one word they said.

Wednesday, 11th. Gentle land and Sea breezes. Employed Airing the Bread,
stowing away water, Stores, etc. In the night the Master and Mr. Gore
returned with the Long Boat, and brought with them one Turtle and a few
Shell fish; the Yawl Mr. Gore left upon the Shoal with 6 Men to endeavour
to strike more Turtle. In the morning 4 of the Natives made us another
Short Visit; 3 of them had been with us the preceeding day, the other was
a stranger. One of these men had a hole through the Bridge* (* The
cartilage of the nostril.) of his nose, in which he stuck a peice of Bone
as thick as my finger. Seeing this we examin'd all their Noses, and found
that they had all holes for the same purpose; they had likewise holes in
their Ears, but no Ornaments hanging to them; they had bracelets on their
Arms made of hair, and like Hoops of small Cord. They sometimes may wear
a kind of fillet about their Heads, for one of them had applied some part
of an old shirt which I had given them to this use.

Thursday, 12th. Winds and weather as Yesterday, and the Employment of the
People the same. At 2 A.M. the Yawl came on board, and brought 3 Turtle
and a large Skeat, and as there was a probability of succeeding in this
kind of fishery, I sent her out again after breakfast. About this time 5
of the Natives came over and stay'd with us all the Forenoon. There were
7 in all--5 Men, 1 Woman, and a Boy; these 2 last stay'd on the point of
Land on the other side of the River about 200 Yards from us. We could
very clearly see with our Glasses that the Woman was as naked as ever she
was born; even those parts which I always before now thought Nature would
have taught a woman to Conceal were uncovered.

Friday, 13th. Gentle breezes from the South-East in day, and Calm or
light Airs from the Land in the Night. Employ'd taking on board water,
Stores, etc. At Noon the Yawl return'd with one Turtle and a large Sting
ray.

Saturday, 14th. Gentle breezes at South-East and Hazey weather. In the
P.M. compleated our water; got on board all the Bread, and part of our
Stores; in the evening sent the Turtlers out again. A.M., employ'd
getting on board stone ballast and Airing the spare Sails. Mr. Gore,
being in the Country, shott one of the Animals before spoke of; it was a
small one of the sort, weighing only 28 pound clear of the entrails; its
body was ----* (* Blank in manuscript.) long; the head, neck, and
Shoulders very Small in proportion to the other parts. It was hair lipt,
and the Head and Ears were most like a Hare's of any Animal I know; the
Tail was nearly as long as the body, thick next the Rump, and Tapering
towards the End; the fore Legs were 8 Inches long, and the Hind 22. Its
progression is by Hopping or Jumping 7 or 8 feet at each hop upon its
hind Legs only, for in this it makes no use of the Fore, which seem to be
only design'd for Scratching in the ground, etc. The Skin is cover'd with
a Short, hairy furr of a dark Mouse or Grey Colour. It bears no sort of
resemblance to any European animal I ever saw; it is said to bear much
resemblance to the Jerboa, excepting in size, the Jerboa being no larger
than a common rat.

Sunday, 15th. Gentle breezes at South-East and East. P.M., got on board
the Spare Sails and sundry other Articles. In the A.M., as the people did
not work upon the Ship, one of the Petty Officers was desirous of going
out to Catch Turtles. I let him have the Pinnace for that purpose, and
sent the Long boat to haul the Sean, who caught about 60 fish.

Monday, 16th. Fore and Latter parts gentle breezes at East-North-East; in
the night had light Airs and Calm. In the evening the Yawl came in with 4
Turtle and a Large Sting ray, and soon after went out again; but the
Pinnace did not return as I expected. A.M., employ'd getting on board
Cables; at the same time I went upon one of the high hills on the North
side of the River, from which I had an extensive view of the inland
Country, which consisted of hills, Valleys, and Large plains, agreeably
diversified with Woods and Lawns.

Tuesday, 17th. Wind at South-East, a fresh breeze; people employed as
yesterday setting up the rigging. In the evening the Pinnace returned
with 3 Turtles, 2 of which the Yawl caught and sent in. At 7 hours 41
minutes 17 seconds p.m. observ'd the first Satellite of Jupiter to
Emerge, and the same Emersion hapned at Greenwich at 10 hours 00 minutes
52 seconds in the a.m.; the difference is 14 hours 19 minutes 35 seconds
equal to 214 degrees 53 minutes 45 seconds of Longitude. The observation
made on the 29th of last Month gave 214 degrees 42 minutes 30 seconds;
the mean is 214 degrees 48 minutes 7 1/2 seconds, which this place is
West of Greenwich.* (* As before mentioned, the true longitude is 214
degrees 45 minutes.)

Wednesday, 18th. Wind at East-South-East, a Gentle breeze. P.M., I sent
the Master and one of the Mates in the Pinnace to the Northward to look
for a Channell that way clear of the Shoal. Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, and
myself took a turn into the woods on the other side of the water, where
we met with 5 of the Natives; and although we had not seen any of them
before, they came to us without showing any signs of fear. 2 of these
wore Necklaces made of Shells, which they seem'd to Value, as they would
not part with them. In the evening the Yawl came in with 3 Turtle, and
early in the A.M. she went out again. About 8 we were Visited by several
of the Natives, who now became more familiar than ever. Soon after this
Mr. Banks and I went over to the South* (* This should be North.) side of
the River, and Travel'd 6 or 8 miles along shore to the Northward, where
we ascended a high hill, from whence I had an extensive view of the Sea
Coast; it afforded us a melancholy prospect of the difficulties we are to
encounter, for in whatever direction we looked it was cover'd with Shoals
as far as the Eye could see; after this we return'd to the Ship without
meeting with anything remarkable, and found several of the Natives on
board. At this time we had 12 tortoise or Turtle upon our Decks, which
they took more Notice of than anything Else in the Ship, as I was told by
the officers, for their Curiosity was Satisfied before I got on board,
and they went away soon after.

Thursday, 19th. Gentle breezes and fair weather. Employ'd getting
everything in readyness for Sea. A.M., we were Visited by 10 or 11 of the
Natives; the most of them came from the other side of the Harbour, where
we saw 6 or 7 more, the most of them Women, and, like the men, quite
naked. Those that came on board were very desirous of having some of our
Turtles, and took the liberty to haul 2 of them to the Gangway to put
over the side; being disappointed in this, they grew a little
Troublesome, and were for throwing every thing overboard they could lay
their hands upon. As we had no Victuals dress'd at this time, I offer'd
them some bread to Eat, which they rejected with Scorn, as I believe they
would have done anything else excepting Turtle;* (* No doubt, in the
native view, the turtle belonged to them, and they considered the
strangers had annexed their property.) soon after this they all went
ashore, Mr. Banks, myself, and 5 or 6 of our people being their at same
time. Immediately upon their Landing one of tbem took a Handful of dry
grass and lighted it at a fire we had ashore, and before we well know'd
what he was going about he made a larger Circuit round about us, and set
fire to the grass in his way, and in an instant the whole place was in
flames. Luckily at this time we had hardly anything ashore, besides the
Forge and a Sow with a litter of young Pigs, one of which was scorched to
Death in the fire. As soon as they had done this they all went to a place
where some of our people were washing, and where all our nets and a good
deal of linnen were laid out to dry; here with the greatest obstinacy
they again set fire to the grass, which I and some others who were
present could not prevent, until I was obliged to fire a Musquet load
with small Shott at one of the Ring leaders, which sent them off. As we
were apprised of this last Attempt of theirs we got the fire out before
it got head, but the first spread like wild fire in the Woods and grass.
Notwithstanding my firing, in which one must have been a little hurt,
because we saw a few drops of blood on some of the linnen he had gone
over, they did not go far from us; for we soon after heard their Voices
in the woods, upon which Mr. Banks and I and 3 or 4 more went to look for
them, and very soon met them coming toward us. As they had each 4 or 5
Darts, and not knowing their intention, we seized upon 6 or 7 of the
first darts we met with. This alarm'd them so much that they all made
off, and we follow'd them for near 1/2 a Mile, and then set down and
called to them, and they stop'd also; after some little unintelligible
conversation had passed they laid down their darts, and came to us in a
very friendly manner. We now return'd the Darts we had taken from them,
which reconcil'd everything. There were 4 Strangers among them that we
had not seen before, and these were interduced to us by name by the
others; the Man which we supposed to have been Struck with small Shott
was gone off, but he could not be much hurt as he was at a great distance
when I fir'd. They all came along with us abreast of the Ship, where they
stay'd a short time, and then went away, and soon after set the woods on
fire about a Mile and a half or two Miles from us.

Friday, 20th. Fresh breezes at South-East and Cloudy weather. P.M., got
everything on board the Ship, new berth'd her, and let her swing with the
tide. In the night the Master return'd with the pinnace, and reported
that there was no safe Passage for the Ship to the Northward at low
water. A.M., I went and Sounded and buoy'd the Bar, being now ready to
put to sea the first opportunity.

Saturday, 21st. Strong breezes at South-East and Cloudy weather. P.M.,
sent a Boat to haul the Sean, which return'd with as much fish as came to
1 3/4 pounds per Man; the Yawl return'd with only one Turtle, which was
caught in the Net, for it blew too hard for the Boat to strike any. In
the morning I sent her out again, but she was obliged to return, not
being able to get to Windward. The Carpenters employ'd in repairing the
Boats and overhauling the Pumps, and as the Wind would not permit us to
sail, I sent the Boatswain with some hands ashore to make rope, and a
petty Officer with 2 Men to gather Greens for the Ship's Company.

Sunday, 22nd. Fresh breezes at South-East and East-South-East. Employ'd
as Yesterday. A.M., the weather would not permit us to Sail; sent the
Turtlers out again. In opening of one to-day we found sticking thro' both
Shoulder bones a wood Harpoon, or Turtle Peg, 15 Inches long, bearded at
the end, such as we have seen among the Natives; this proves to a
Demonstration that they strike Turtle, I suppose at the Time they come
ashore to lay their Eggs, for they certainly have no boat fit to do this
at Sea, or that will carry a Turtle, and this Harpoon must have been a
good while in, as the wound was quite heal'd up.

Monday, 23rd. Fresh breezes in the South-East quarter, which so long as
it continues will confine us in Port. Yesterday, A.M., I sent some people
in the Country to gather greens, one of which stragled from the rest, and
met with 4 of the Natives by a fire, on which they were broiling a Fowl,
and the hind leg of one of the Animals before spoke of. He had the
presence of mind not to run from them (being unarm'd), least they should
pursue him, but went and set down by them; and after he had set a little
while, and they had felt his hands and other parts of his body, they
suffer'd him to go away without offering the least insult, and perceiving
that he did not go right for the Ship they directed him which way to go.

Tuesday, 24th. Winds and weather continues. The Seamen employ'd making
ropes, Caulking the Ship, Fishing, etc.

Wednesday, 25th. Fresh gales at South-East and fair weather. In the
evening the Yawl came in, having not been able to Strike one Turtle on
account of the blowing weather, nor can we catch much fish with the Sean
in the Harbour.

Thursday, 26th. Winds and weather as Yesterday. Such people as can be
spared from the necessary Dutys of the Ship are employ'd fishing and
gathering greens and other refreshments.

Friday, 27th. Very fresh Gales at South-East by South and fair weather.
A.M., caught as much fish as served 3/4 pounds a man, and Mr. Gore shott
one of the Animals before spoke of, which weighed 80 pounds and 54
pounds, exclusive of the entrails, Skin, and head; this was as large as
the most we have seen.

Saturday, 28th. Winds and weather as above, without the least Variation
the whole of the 24 hours. The Carpenters finish'd caulking the Ship.

Sunday, 29th. Winds at South-East, a fresh breeze until 5 a.m., at which
time it fell calm, and soon after had a light breeze from the land. Upon
this I sent a Boat to see what water was upon the bar (it being 2 hours
Ebb), and hove up the Anchor in order to put to Sea; but upon the return
of the Boat came too again, as there were only 13 feet water on the Bar,
which was 6 Inches less water than what the Ship Draw'd. After this I
sent the Yawl to look for Turtle, as those we had got before were nearly
all expended. About 8 the Sea breeze set in again, which put an end to
our Sailing this day; after which I sent the Pinnace to haul the Sean;
she return'd with only 20 pounds of Fish.

Monday, 30th. Winds at South-East, a fresh Gale and fair weather in the
P.M., the remainder Hazey, with rain, but the winds, tho more moderate,
keept in the South-East quarter.

Tuesday, 31st. Fresh Gales at South-East, and hazey with rain all P.M.
and most part of the Night. At 2 a.m. I had thoughts of trying to Warp
the Ship out of the Harbour, but upon my going first out in a Boat I
found it blow too fresh for such an Attempt.

[August 1770.]

Wednesday, 1st August. Strong Gales from the South-East, with Squalls
attended with Rain. P.M., the Yawl came in with 2 Rays, which together
weighed 265 pounds; it blow'd too hard all the time they were out for
striking Turtle. Carpenters employ'd overhauling the Pumps, all of which
we find in a state of decay; and this the Carpenter says is owing to the
Sap having been left in, which in time has decay'd the sound wood. One of
them is quite useless, and was so rotten when hoisted up as to drop to
peices. However, I cannot complain of a Leaky Ship, for the most water
She makes is not quite an Inch an Hour.

Thursday, 2nd. Winds and weather as yesterday, or rather more Stormy; we
have now no Success in the Sein fishing, hardly getting above 20 or 30
pounds a day.

Friday, 3rd. Strong breezes, and hazey until 6 a.m., when it moderated,
and we unmoor'd, hove up the Anchor, and began to Warp out; but the Ship
tailing upon the Sand on the North side of the River, the Tide of Ebb
making out, and a fresh breeze setting in, we were obliged to desist and
moor the Ship again just within the Barr.

Saturday, 4th. In the P.M., having pretty moderate weather, I order'd the
Coasting Anchor and Cable to be laid without the barr, to be ready to
warp out by, that we might not loose the least opportunity that might
Offer; for laying in Port spends time to no purpose, consumes our
Provisions, of which we are very Short in many Articles, and we have yet
a long Passage to make to the East Indies through an unknown and perhaps
dangerous Sea; these Circumstances consider'd, make me very Anxious of
getting to Sea. The wind continued moderate all night, and at 5 a.m. it
fell calm; this gave us an opportunity to warp out. About 7 we got under
sail, having a light Air from the Land, which soon died away, and was
Succeeded by the Sea breezes from South-East by South, with which we
stood off to Sea East by North, having the Pinnace ahead sounding. The
Yawl I sent to the Turtle bank to take up the Net that was left there;
but as the wind freshen'd we got out before her, and a little After Noon
Anchor'd in 15 fathoms water, Sandy bottom, for I did not think it safe
to run in among the Shoals until I had well view'd them at low Water from
the Mast head, that I might be better Able to Judge which way to Steer;
for as yet I had not resolved whether I should beat back to the Southward
round all the Shoals, or seek a Passage to the Eastward or Northward, all
of which appeared to be equally difficult and dangerous. When at Anchor
the Harbour sail'd from bore South 70 degrees West, distant 4 or 5
Leagues; the Northermost point of the Main land we have in sight, which I
named Cape Bedford* (* Probably after John, 4th Duke, who had been First
Lord of the Admiralty, 1744 to 1747.) (Latitude 15 degrees 17 minutes
South, Longitude 214 degrees 45 minutes West), bore North 20 degrees
West, distant 3 1/2 Leagues; but we could see land to the North-East of
this Cape, which made like 2 high Islands;* (* Direction Islands.) the
Turtle banks bore East, distant one Mile. Latitude by Observation 15
degrees 23 minutes South; our depth of Water, in standing off from the
land, was from 3 1/2 to 15 fathoms.

[Description of Endeavour River.]

I shall now give a Short description of the Harbour, or River, we have
been in, which I named after the Ship, Endeavour River. It is only a
small Barr Harbour or Creek, which runs winding 3 or 4 Leagues in land,
at the Head of which is a small fresh Water Brook, as I was told, for I
was not so high myself; but there is not water for Shipping above a Mile
within the barr, and this is on the North side, where the bank is so
steep for nearly a quarter of a Mile that ships may lay afloat at low
water so near the Shore as to reach it with a stage, and is extreamly
Convenient for heaving a Ship down. And this is all the River hath to
recommend it, especially for large Shipping, for there is no more than 9
or 10 feet Water upon the Bar at low water, and 17 or 18 feet at high,
the Tides rises and falling about 9 feet at spring Tide, and is high on
the days of the New and full Moon, between 9 and 10 o'Clock. Besides,
this part of the Coast is barrocaded with Shoals, as to make this Harbour
more difficult of access; the safest way I know of to come at it is from
the South, Keeping the Main land close on board all the way. Its
situation may always be found by the Latitude, which hath been before
mentioned. Over the South point is some high Land, but the North point is
formed by a low sandy beach, which extends about 3 Miles to the
Northward, then the land is again high.

The refreshments we got here were Chiefly Turtle, but as we had to go 5
Leagues out to Sea for them, and had much blowing weather, we were not
over Stocked with this Article; however, what with these and the fish we
caught with the Sean we had not much reason to Complain, considering the
Country we were in. Whatever refreshment we got that would bear a
Division I caused to be equally divided among the whole Company,
generally by weight; the meanest person in the Ship had an equal share
with myself or any one on board, and this method every commander of a
Ship on such a Voyage as this ought ever to Observe. We found in several
places on the Sandy beaches and Sand Hills near the Sea, Purslain and
beans, which grows on a Creeping kind of a Vine. The first we found very
good when boiled, and the latter not to be dispised, and were at first
very serviceable to the Sick; but the best greens we found here was the
Tarra, or Coco Tops, called in the West Indies Indian Kale,* (* Colocasia
Macrorhiza.) which grows in most Boggy Places; these eat as well as, or
better, than Spinnage. The roots, for want of being Transplanted and
properly Cultivated, were not good, yet we could have dispensed with them
could we have got them in any Tolerable plenty; but having a good way to
go for them, it took up too much time and too many hands to gather both
root and branch. The few Cabage Palms we found here were in General
small, and yielded so little Cabage that they were not worth the Looking
after, and this was the Case with most of the fruit, etc., we found in
the woods.

Besides the Animals which I have before mentioned, called by the Natives
Kangooroo, or Kanguru, here are Wolves,* (* Probably Dingos.) Possums, an
Animal like a ratt, and snakes, both of the Venemous and other sorts.
Tame Animals here are none except Dogs, and of these we never saw but
one, who frequently came about our Tents to pick up bones, etc. The
Kanguru are in the greatest number, for we seldom went into the Country
without seeing some. The land Fowls we met here, which far from being
numerous, were Crows, Kites, Hawkes, Cockadores* (* Cockatoos.) of 2
Sorts, the one white, and the other brown, very beautiful Loryquets of 2
or 3 Sorts, Pidgeons, Doves, and a few other sorts of small Birds. The
Sea or Water fowl are Herns, Whisling Ducks, which perch and, I believe,
roost on Trees; Curlews, etc., and not many of these neither. Some of our
Gentlemen who were in the Country heard and saw Wild Geese in the Night.

The Country, as far as I could see, is diversified with Hills and plains,
and these with woods and Lawns; the Soil of the Hills is hard, dry, and
very Stoney; yet it produceth a thin Coarse grass, and some wood. The
Soil of the Plains and Valleys are sandy, and in some places Clay, and in
many Parts very Rocky and Stoney, as well as the Hills, but in general
the Land is pretty well Cloathed with long grass, wood, Shrubs, etc. The
whole Country abounds with an immense number of Ant Hills, some of which
are 6 or 8 feet high, and more than twice that in Circuit. Here are but
few sorts of Trees besides the Gum tree, which is the most numerous, and
is the same that we found on the Southern Part of the Coast, only here
they do not grow near so large. On each side of the River, all the way up
it, are Mangroves, which Extend in some places a Mile from its banks; the
Country in general is not badly water'd, there being several fine
Rivulets at no very great distance from one another, but none near to the
place where we lay; at least not in the Dry season, which is at this
time. However we were very well supply'd with water by springs which were
not far off.* (* Cooktown, which now stands on the Endeavour River, is a
thriving place, and the northernmost town on this coast. It has some 2000
inhabitants, and is the port for a gold mining district. A deeper channel
has now been dredged over the bar that gave Cook so much trouble, but it
is not a harbour that will admit large vessels.)

[At Anchor, Off Turtle Reef, Queensland.]

Sunday, 5th. In the P.M. had a Gentle breeze at South-East and Clear
weather. As I did not intend to weigh until the morning I sent all the
Boats to the Reef to get what Turtle and Shell fish they could. At low
water from the Mast head I took a view of the Shoals, and could see
several laying a long way without this one, a part of several of them
appearing above water; but as it appear'd pretty clear of Shoals to the
North-East of the Turtle Reef, I came to a Resolution to stretch out that
way close upon a wind, because if we found no Passage we could always
return back the way we went. In the Evening the Boats return'd with one
Turtle, a sting ray, and as many large Clams as came to 1 1/2 pounds a
Man; in each of these Clams were about 20 pounds of Meat; added to this
we Caught in the night several Sharks. Early in the morning I sent the
Pinnace and Yawl again to the Reef, as I did not intend to weigh until
half Ebb, at which time the Shoals began to appear. Before 8 it came on
to blow, and I made the Signal for the Boats to come on Board, which they
did, and brought with them one Turtle. We afterwards began to heave, but
the wind Freshening obliged us to bear away* (* To veer cable, i.e., pay
out more cable, in order to hold the ship with the freshening wind.)
again and lay fast.

Monday, 6th. Winds at South-East. At 2 o'Clock p.m. it fell pretty
Moderate, and we got under sail, and stood out upon a wind North-East by
East, leaving the Turtle Reef to windward, having the Pinnace ahead
sounding. We had not stood out long before we discovered shoals ahead and
on both bows. At half past 4 o'Clock, having run off 8 Miles, the Pinnace
made the Signal for Shoal water in a place where we little Expected it;
upon this we Tack'd and Stood on and off while the Pinnace stretched
farther to the Eastward, but as night was approaching I thought it safest
to Anchor, which we accordingly did in 20 fathoms water, a Muddy bottom.
Endeavour River bore South 52 degrees West; Cape Bedford West by North
1/2 North, distant 5 Leagues; the Northermost land in sight, which made
like an Island, North; and a Shoal, a small, sandy part of which appear'd
above water, North-East, distance 2 or 3 Miles. In standing off from this
Turtle Reef to this place our soundings were from 14 to 20 fathoms, but
where the Pinnace was, about a Mile farther to the East-North-East, were
no more than 4 or 5 feet of water, rocky ground; and yet this did not
appear to us in the Ship. In the morning we had a strong Gale from the
South-East, that, instead of weighing as we intended, we were obliged to
bear away more Cable, and to Strike Top Gallant yards.

Tuesday, 7th. Strong Gales at South-East, South-East by South, and
South-South-East, with cloudy weather at Low water in the P.M. I and
several of the Officers kept a look out at the Mast head to see for a
Passage between the Shoals; but we could see nothing but breakers all the
way from the South round by the East as far as North-West, extending out
to Sea as far as we could see. It did not appear to be one continued
Shoal, but several laying detached from each other. On the Eastermost
that we could see the Sea broke very high, which made one judge it to be
the outermost; for on many of those within the Sea did not break high at
all, and from about 1/2 flood to 1/2 Ebb they are not to be seen, which
makes the Sailing among them more dangerous, and requires great care and
Circumspection, for, like all other Shoals, or Reefs of Coral Rocks, they
are quite steep too. Altho' the most of these Shoals consist of Coral
Rocks, yet a part of some of them is sand. The Turtle Reef and some
others have a small Patch of Sand generally at the North end, that is
only cover'd at high water. These generally discover themselves before we
come near them. Altho' I speak of this as the Turtle Reef, yet it is not
to be doubted but what there are Turtle upon the most of them as well as
this one. After having well viewed our situation from the Mast Head, I
saw that we were surrounded on every side with Dangers, in so much that I
was quite at a loss which way to steer when the weather will permit us to
get under sail, for to beat back to the South-East the way we came, as
the Master would have had me done, would be an endless peice of work, as
the winds blow constantly from that Quarter, and very Strong, without
hardly any intermission;* (* The south-east trade wind blows home on this
coast very strong from about June to October. Though the Barrier Reef
prevents any great sea from getting up, the continuance of this wind is a
great nuisance for a sailing ship from many points of view though from
others it is an advantage.) on the other hand, if we do not find a
passage to the Northward we shall have to come back at last. At 11 the
Ship drove, and obliged us to bear away to a Cable and one third, which
brought us up again; but in the morning the Gale increasing, she drove
again. This made us let go the Small Bower Anchor, and bear away a whole
Cable on it and 2 on the other; and even after this she still kept
driving slowly, until we had got down Top gallant Masts, struck Yards and
Top masts close down, and made all snug; then she rid fast, Cape Bedford
bearing West-South-West, distant 3 1/2 Leagues. In this situation we had
Shoals to the Eastward of us extending from the South-East by South to
the North-North-West, distant from the nearest part of them about 2
Miles.

Wednesday, 8th. Strong gales at South-South-East all this day, in so much
that I durst not get up Yards and Topmasts.

Thursday, 9th. In the P.M., the weather being something moderate, we got
up the Top masts, but keept the Lower yards down. At 6 in the morning we
began to heave in the Cable, thinking to get under sail; but it blow'd so
fresh, together with a head sea, that we could hardly heave the ship a
head, and at last was obliged to desist.

[Off Cape Flattery, Queensland.]

Friday, 10th. Fresh Gales at South-South-East and South-East by South.
P.M., the wind fell so that we got up the small Bower Anchor, and hove
into a whole Cable on the Best Bower. At 3 in the morning we got up the
Lower Yards, and at 7 weighed and stood in for the Land (intending to
seek for a passage along Shore to the northward), having a Boat ahead
sounding; depth of water as we run in from 19 to 12 fathoms. After
standing in an hour we edged away for 3 Small Islands* (* Now called the
Three Isles.) that lay North-North-East 1/2 East, 3 Leagues from Cape
Bedford. To these Islands the Master had been in the Pinnace when the
Ship was in Port. At 9 we were abreast of them, and between them and the
Main, having another low Island between us and the latter, which lies
West-North-West, 4 Miles from the 3 Islands. In this Channell had 14
fathoms water; the Northermost point of the Main we had in sight bore
from us North-North-West 1/2 West, distant 2 Leagues. 4 or 5 Leagues to
the North-East of this head land appeared 3 high Islands,* (* The
Direction Islands.) with some smaller ones near them, and the Shoals and
Reefs without, as we could see, extending to the Northward as far as
these Islands. We directed our Course between them and the above
headland, leaving a small Island* (* The Two Isles. Cook had now got
among the numerous islands and reefs which lie round Cape Flattery. There
are good channels between them, but they are very confusing to a
stranger. Cook's anxiety in his situation can well be imagined,
especially with his recent disaster in his mind.) to the Eastward of us,
which lies North by East, 4 Miles from the 3 Islands, having all the
while a boat ahead sounding. At Noon we were got between the head Land
and the 3 high Islands, distant from the former 2, and from the latter 4
Leagues; our Latitude by observation was 14 degrees 51 minutes South. We
now judged ourselves to be clear of all Danger, having, as we thought, a
Clear, open Sea before us; but this we soon found otherwise, and
occasioned my calling the Headland above mentioned Cape Flattery
(Latitude 14 degrees 55 minutes South, Longitude 214 degrees 43 minutes
West). It is a high Promontory, making in 2 Hills next the sea, and a
third behind them, with low sandy land on each side; but it is better
known by the 3 high Islands out at Sea, the Northermost of which is the
Largest, and lies from the Cape North-North-East, distant 5 Leagues. From
this Cape the Main land trends away North-West and North-West by West.

Saturday, 11th. Fresh breezes at South-South-East and South-East by
South, with which we steer'd along shore North-West by West until one
o'Clock, when the Petty Officer at the Masthead called out that he saw
land ahead, extending quite round to the Islands without, and a large
reef between us and them; upon this I went to the Masthead myself. The
reef I saw very plain, which was now so far to windward that we could not
weather it, but what he took for Main land ahead were only small Islands,
for such they appeared to me; but, before I had well got from Mast head
the Master and some others went up, who all asserted that it was a
Continuation of the Main land, and, to make it still more alarming, they
said they saw breakers in a Manner all round us. We immediately hauld
upon a wind in for the Land, and made the Signal for the Boat, which was
ahead sounding, to come on board; but as she was well to leeward, we were
obliged to edge away to take her up, and soon after came to an Anchor
under a point of the Main in 1/4 less 5* (* The nautical manner of
expressing four and three-quarters.) fathoms, about a Mile from the
Shore, Cape Flattery bearing South-East, distant 3 1/2 Leagues. After
this I landed, and went upon the point, which is pretty high, from which
I had a View of the Sea Coast, which trended away North-West by West, 8
or 10 Leagues, which was as far as I could see, the weather not being
very clear. I likewise saw 9 or 10 Small, Low Islands and some Shoals
laying off the Coast, and some large Shoals between the Main and the 3
high Islands, without which, I was now well assured, were Islands, and
not a part of the Mainland as some had taken them to be. Excepting Cape
Flattery and the point I am now upon, which I have named point Lookout,
the Main land next the sea to the Northward of Cape Bedford is low, and
Chequer'd with white sand and green Bushes, etc., for 10 or 12 Miles
inland, beyond which is high land. To the northward of Point Lookout the
shore appear'd to be shoal and flat some distance off, which was no good
sign of meeting with a Channell in with the land, as we have hitherto
done. We saw the footsteps of people upon the sand, and smoke and fire up
in the Country, and in the evening return'd on board, where I came to a
resolution to visit one of the high Islands in the Offing in my Boat, as
they lay at least 5 Leagues out at Sea, and seem'd to be of such a height
that from the Top of one of them I hoped to see and find a Passage out to
sea clear of the Shoals. Accordingly in the Morning I set out in the
Pinnace for the Northermost and largest of the 3, accompanied by Mr.
Banks. At the same time I sent the Master in the Yawl to Leeward, to
sound between the Low Islands and the Main. In my way to the Island I
passed over a large reef of Coral Rocks and sand, which lies about 2
Leagues from the Island; I left another to leeward, which lays about 3
Miles from the Island. [On Lizard Island, Queensland.] On the North part
of this is a low, sandy Isle, with Trees upon it; on the reef we pass'd
over in the Boat we saw several Turtle, and Chased one or Two, but caught
none, it blowing too hard, and I had no time to spare, being otherways
employ'd. I did not reach the Island until half an hour after one o'Clock
in the P.M. on

Sunday, 12th, when I immediately went upon the highest hill on the
Island,* (* Lizard Island.) where, to my Mortification, I discover'd a
Reef of Rocks laying about 2 or 3 Leagues without the Island, extending
in a line North-West and South-East, farther than I could see, on which
the sea broke very high.* (* This was the outer edge of the Barrier
Reefs.) This, however, gave one great hopes that they were the outermost
shoals, as I did not doubt but what I should be able to get without them,
for there appeared to be several breaks or Partitions in the Reef, and
Deep Water between it and the Islands. I stay'd upon the Hill until near
sun set, but the weather continued so Hazey all the time that I could not
see above 4 or 5 Leagues round me, so that I came down much disappointed
in the prospect I expected to have had, but being in hopes the morning
might prove Clearer, and give me a better View of the Shoals. With this
view I stay'd all night upon the Island, and at 3 in the Morning sent the
Pinnace, with one of the Mates I had with me, to sound between the Island
and the Reefs, and to Examine one of the breaks or Channels; and in the
mean time I went again upon the Hill, where I arrived by Sun Rise, but
found it much Hazier than in the Evening. About Noon the pinnace
return'd, having been out as far as the Reef, and found from 15 to 28
fathoms water. It blow'd so hard that they durst not venture into one of
the Channels, which, the Mate said, seem'd to him to be very narrow; but
this did not discourage me, for I thought from the place he was at he
must have seen it at disadvantage. Before I quit this Island I shall
describe it. It lies, as I have before observed, about 5 Leagues from the
Main; it is about 8 Miles in Circuit, and of a height sufficient to be
seen 10 or 12 Leagues; it is mostly high land, very rocky and barren,
except on the North-West side, where there are some sandy bays and low
land, which last is covered with thin, long grass, Trees, etc., the same
as upon the Main. Here is also fresh Water in 2 places; the one is a
running stream, the water a little brackish where I tasted it, which was
close to the sea; the other is a standing pool, close behind the sandy
beach, of good, sweet water, as I daresay the other is a little way from
the Sea beach. The only land Animals we saw here were Lizards, and these
seem'd to be pretty Plenty, which occasioned my naming the Island Lizard
Island. The inhabitants of the Main visit this Island at some Seasons of
the Year, for we saw the Ruins of Several of their Hutts and heaps of
Shells, etc. South-East, 4 or 5 Miles from this Island, lay the other 2
high Islands, which are very small compared to this; and near them lay 3
others, yet smaller and lower Islands, and several Shoals or reefs,
especially to the South-East. There is, however, a clear passage from
Cape Flattery to those Islands, and even quite out to the outer Reefs,
leaving the above Islands to the South-East and Lizard Island to the
North-West.

Monday, 13th. At 2 P.M. I left Lizard Island in order to return to the
Ship, and in my way landed upon the low sandy Isle mentioned in coming
out. We found on this Island* (* Eagle Island.) a pretty number of Birds,
the most of them sea Fowl, except Eagles; 2 of the Latter we shott and
some of the others; we likewise saw some Turtles, but got none, for the
reasons before mentioned. After leaving Eagle Isle I stood South-West
direct for the Ship, sounding all the way, and had not less than 8
fathoms, nor more than 14. I had the same depth of Water between Lizard
and Eagle Isle. After I got on board the Master inform'd me he had been
down to the Islands I had directed him to go too, which he judged to lay
about 3 Leagues from the Main, and had sounded the Channel between the 2,
found 7 fathoms; this was near the Islands, for in with the Main he had
only 9 feet 3 Miles off, but without the Islands he found 10, 12, and 14
fathoms. He found upon the islands piles of turtle shells, and some finns
that were so fresh that both he and the boats' crew eat of them. This
showed that the natives must have been there lately. After well
considering both what I had seen myself and the report of the Master's, I
found by experience that by keeping in with the Mainland we should be in
continued danger, besides the risk we should run in being lock'd in with
Shoals and reefs by not finding a passage out to Leeward. In case we
persever'd in keeping the Shore on board an accident of this kind, or any
other that might happen to the ship, would infallibly loose our passage
to the East India's this Season,* (* In November the wind changes to the
North-West, which would have been a foul wind to Batavia.) and might
prove the ruin of both ourselves and the Voyage, as we have now little
more than 3 Months' Provisions on board, and that at short allowance.
Wherefore, after consulting with the Officers, I resolved to weigh in the
morning, and Endeavour to quit the Coast altogether until such time as I
found I could approach it with less danger. With this View we got under
sail at daylight in the morning, and stood out North-East for the
North-West end of Lizard Island, having Eagle Island to windward of us,
having the pinnace ahead sounding; and here we found a good Channell,
wherein we had from 9 to 14 fathoms. At Noon the North end of Lizard
Island bore East-South-East, distant one Mile; Latitude observed 14
degrees 38 minutes South; depth of water 14 fathoms. We now took the
pinnace in tow, knowing that there were no dangers until we got out to
the Reefs.* (* From the 13th to the 19th the language used in Mr.
Corner's copy of the Journal is quite different from that of the
Admiralty and the Queen's, though the occurrences are the same. From
internal evidences, it appears that Mr. Corner's copy was at this period
the first written up, and that Cook amended the phrases in the other fair
copies.)

[Pass Outside Barrier Reef, Queensland.]

Tuesday, 14th. Winds at South-East, a steady gale. By 2 P.M. we got out
to the outermost reefs, and just fetched to Windward of one of the
openings I had discover'd from the Island; we tacked and Made a short
trip to the South-West, while the Master went in the pinnace to examine
the Channel, who soon made the signal for the Ship to follow, which we
accordingly did, and in a short time got safe out. This Channel* (* Now
known as Cook's Passage.) lies North-East 1/2 North, 3 Leagues from
Lizard Island; it is about one-third of a Mile broad, and 25 or 30
fathoms deep or more. The moment we were without the breakers we had no
ground with 100 fathoms of Line, and found a large Sea rowling in from
the South-East. By this I was well assured we were got with out all the
Shoals, which gave us no small joy, after having been intangled among
Islands and Shoals, more or less, ever since the 26th of May, in which
time we have sail'd above 360 Leagues by the Lead without ever having a
Leadsman out of the Chains, when the ship was under sail; a Circumstance
that perhaps never hapned to any ship before, and yet it was here
absolutely necessary. I should have been very happy to have had it in my
power to have keept in with the land, in order to have explor'd the Coast
to the Northern extremity of the Country, which I think we were not far
off, for I firmly believe this land doth not join to New Guinea. But this
I hope soon either to prove or disprove, and the reasons I have before
assign'd will, I presume, be thought sufficient for my leaving the Coast
at this time; not but what I intend to get in with it again as soon as I
can do it with safety. The passage or channel we now came out by, which I
have named, ----* (* Blank in MS.) lies in the Latitude of 14 degrees 32
minutes South; it may always be found and known by the 3 high Islands
within it, which I have called the Islands of Direction, because by their
means a safe passage may be found even by strangers in within the Main
reef, and quite into the Main. Lizard Island, which is the Northermost
and Largest of the 3, Affords snug Anchorage under the North-West side of
it, fresh water and wood for fuel; and the low Islands and Reefs which
lay between it and the Main, abound with Turtle and other fish, which may
be caught at all Seasons of the Year (except in such blowing weather as
we have lately had). All these things considered there is, perhaps, not a
better place on the whole Coast for a Ship to refresh at than this
Island. I had forgot to mention in its proper place, that not only on
this Island, but on Eagle Island, and on several places of the Sea beach
in and about Endeavour River, we found Bamboos, Cocoa Nutts, the seeds of
some few other plants, and Pummice-stones, which were not the produce of
the Country. From what we have seen of it, it is reasonable to suppose
that they are the produce of some lands or Islands laying in the
Neighbourhood, most likely to the Eastward, and are brought hither by the
Easterly trade winds. The Islands discover'd by Quiros lies in this
parrallel, but how far to the Eastward it's hard to say; for altho' we
found in most Charts his discoveries placed as far to the West as this
country yet from the account of his Voyage, compared with what we
ourselves have seen, we are Morally certain that he never was upon any
part of this Coast.* (* The Island of Espiritu Santo, in the New
Hebrides, which Quiros discovered, lies 1200 miles to the eastward, and
New Caledonia, from which these objects might equally have come, is 1000
miles in the same direction.) As soon as we had got without the Reefs we
Shortened sail, and hoisted in the pinnace and Long boat, which last we
had hung alongside, and then stretched off East-North-East, close upon a
wind, as I did not care to stand to the Northward until we had a whole
day before us, for which reason we keept making short boards all night.
The large hollow sea we have now got into acquaints us with a
Circumstance we did not before know, which is that the Ship hath received
more Damage than we were aware of, or could perceive when in smooth
Water; for now she makes as much water as one pump will free, kept
constantly at work. However this was looked upon as trifling to the
Danger we had lately made an Escape from. At day light in the morning
Lizard Island bore South by West, distant 10 Leagues. We now made all the
sail we could, and stood away North-North-West 1/2 West, but at 9 we
steer'd North-West 1/2 North, having the advantage of a Fresh Gale at
South-East; at Noon we were by observation in the Latitude of 13 degrees
46 minutes South, the Lizard Island bore South 15 degrees East, distant
58 Miles, but we had no land in sight.

Wednesday, 15th. Fresh Trade at South-East and Clear weather. At 6 in the
evening shortned sail and brought too, with her head to the North-East.
By this time we had run near 12 Leagues upon a North-West 1/2 North
Course since Noon. At 4 a.m. wore and lay her head to the South-West, and
at 6 made all Sail, and steer'd West, in order to make the land, being
fearful of over shooting the passage, supposing there to be one, between
this land and New Guinea. By noon we had run 10 Leagues upon this Course,
but saw no land. Our Latitude by observation was 13 degrees 2 minutes
South, Longitude 216 degrees 00 minutes West, which was 1 degree 23
minutes to the West of Lizard Island.

[Ship in Danger, Outside Barrier Reef.]

Thursday, 16th. Moderate breezes at East-South-East and fair weather. A
little after Noon saw the Land from the Mast head bearing
West-South-West, making high; at 2 saw more land to the North-West of the
former, making in hills like Islands; but we took it to be a Continuation
of the Main land. An hour after this we saw a reef, between us and the
land, extending away to the Southward, and, as we thought, terminated
here to the Northward abreast of us; but this was only on op'ning, for
soon after we saw it extend away to the Northward as far as we could
distinguish anything. Upon this we hauld close upon a Wind, which was now
at East-South-East, with all the sail we could set. We had hardly trimm'd
our sails before the wind came to East by North, which made our
weathering the Reef very doubtful, the Northern point of which in sight
at sun set still bore from us North by West, distant about 2 Leagues.
However, this being the best Tack to Clear it, we keept standing to the
Northward, keeping a good look out until 12 at night, when, fearing to
run too far upon one Course, we tack'd and stood to the southward, having
run 6 Leagues North or North by East since sun set; we had not stood
above 2 Miles to the South-South-East before it fell quite Calm. We both
sounded now and several times before, but had not bottom with 140 fathoms
of line.* (* The description which follows, of the situation of the ship,
and the occurrences until she was safely anchored inside the Barrier
Reef, is from the Admiralty copy, as it is much fuller than that in Mr.
Corner's.) A little after 4 o'clock the roaring of the surf was plainly
heard, and at daybreak the Vast foaming breakers were too plainly to be
seen not a mile from us, towards which we found the ship was carried by
the Waves surprisingly fast. We had at this time not an air of Wind, and
the depth of water was unfathomable, so that there was not a possibility
of anchoring. In this distressed Situation we had nothing but Providence
and the small Assistance the Boats could give us to trust to; the Pinnace
was under repair, and could not immediately be hoisted out. The Yawl was
put in the Water, and the Longboat hoisted out, and both sent ahead to
tow, which, together with the help of our sweeps abaft, got the Ship's
head round to the Northward, which seemed to be the best way to keep her
off the Reef, or at least to delay time. Before this was effected it was
6 o'clock, and we were not above 80 or 100 yards from the breakers. The
same sea that washed the side of the ship rose in a breaker prodidgiously
high the very next time it did rise, so that between us and destruction
was only a dismal Valley, the breadth of one wave, and even now no ground
could be felt with 120 fathom. The Pinnace was by this time patched up,
and hoisted out and sent ahead to Tow. Still we had hardly any hopes of
saving the ship, and full as little our lives, as we were full 10 Leagues
from the nearest Land, and the boats not sufficient to carry the whole of
us; yet in this Truly Terrible Situation not one man ceased to do his
utmost, and that with as much Calmness as if no danger had been near. All
the dangers we had escaped were little in comparison of being thrown upon
this reef, where the Ship must be dashed to pieces in a Moment. A reef
such as one speaks of here is Scarcely known in Europe. It is a Wall of
Coral Rock rising almost perpendicular out of the unfathomable Ocean,
always overflown at high Water generally 7 or 8 feet, and dry in places
at Low Water. The Large Waves of the Vast Ocean meeting with so sudden a
resistance makes a most Terrible Surf, breaking Mountains high,
especially as in our case, when the General Trade Wind blows directly
upon it. At this Critical juncture, when all our endeavours seemed too
little, a Small Air of Wind sprung up, but so small that at any other
Time in a Calm we should not have observed it. With this, and the
Assistance of our Boats, we could observe the Ship to move off from the
Reef in a slanting direction; but in less than 10 Minutes we had as flat
a Calm as ever, when our fears were again renewed, for as yet we were not
above 200 Yards from the Breakers. Soon after our friendly Breeze visited
us again, and lasted about as long as before. A Small Opening was now
Seen in the Reef about a 1/4 of a Mile from us, which I sent one of the
Mates to Examine. Its breadth was not more than the Length of the Ship,
but within was Smooth Water. Into this place it was resolved to Push her
if Possible, having no other Probable Views to save her, for we were
still in the very Jaws of distruction, and it was a doubt wether or no we
could reach this Opening. However, we soon got off it, when to our
Surprise we found the Tide of Ebb gushing out like a Mill Stream, so that
it was impossible to get in. We however took all the Advantage Possible
of it, and it Carried us out about a 1/4 of a Mile from the breakers; but
it was too Narrow for us to keep in long. However, what with the help of
this Ebb, and our Boats, we by Noon had got an Offing of 1 1/2 or 2
Miles, yet we could hardly flatter ourselves with hopes of getting Clear,
even if a breeze should Spring up, as we were by this time embay'd by the
Reef, and the Ship, in Spite of our Endeavours, driving before the Sea
into the bight. The Ebb had been in our favour, and we had reason to
Suppose the flood which was now made would be against us. The only hopes
we had was another Opening we saw about a Mile to the Westward of us,
which I sent Lieutenant Hicks in the Small Boat to Examine. Latitude
observed 12 degrees 37 minutes South, the Main Land in Sight distant
about 10 Leagues.

[Pass Again Inside Barrier Reef.]

Friday, 17th. While Mr. Hicks was Examining the opening we struggled hard
with the flood, sometime gaining a little and at other times loosing. At
2 o'Clock Mr. Hicks returned with a favourable Account of the Opening. It
was immediately resolved to Try to secure the Ship in it. Narrow and
dangerous as it was, it seemed to be the only means we had of saving her,
as well as ourselves. A light breeze soon after sprung up at
East-North-East, with which, the help of our Boats, and a Flood Tide, we
soon entered the Opening, and was hurried thro' in a short time by a
Rappid Tide like a Mill race, which kept us from driving against either
side, though the Channel was not more than a 1/4 of a Mile broad, having
2 Boats ahead of us sounding.* (* This picture of the narrow escape from
total shipwreck is very graphic. Many a ship has been lost under similar
circumstances, without any idea of anchoring, which would often save a
vessel, as it is not often that a reef is so absolutely steep; but that
Cook had this possibility in his mind is clear. As a proof of the
calmness which prevailed on board, it may be mentioned that when in the
height of the danger, Mr. Green, Mr. Clerke, and Mr. Forwood the gunner,
were engaged in taking a Lunar, to obtain the longitude. The note in Mr.
Green's log is: "These observations were very good, the limbs of sun and
moon very distinct, and a good horizon. We were about 100 yards from the
reef, where we expected the ship to strike every minute, it being calm,
no soundings, and the swell heaving us right on.") Our deepth of water
was from 30 to 7 fathoms; very irregular soundings and foul ground until
we had got quite within the Reef, where we Anchor'd in 19 fathoms, a
Coral and Shelly bottom. The Channel we came in by, which I have named
Providential Channell, bore East-North-East, distant 10 or 12 Miles,
being about 8 or 9 Leagues from the Main land, which extended from North
66 degrees West to South-West by South.

It is but a few days ago that I rejoiced at having got without the Reef;
but that joy was nothing when Compared to what I now felt at being safe
at an Anchor within it. Such are the Visissitudes attending this kind of
Service, and must always attend an unknown Navigation where one steers
wholy in the dark without any manner of Guide whatever. Was it not from
the pleasure which Naturly results to a man from his being the first
discoverer, even was it nothing more than Land or Shoals, this kind of
Service would be insupportable, especially in far distant parts like
this, Short of Provisions and almost every other necessary. People will
hardly admit of an excuse for a Man leaving a Coast unexplored he has
once discovered. If dangers are his excuse, he is then charged with
Timerousness and want of Perseverance, and at once pronounced to be the
most unfit man in the world to be employ'd as a discoverer; if, on the
other hand, he boldly encounters all the dangers and Obstacles he meets
with, and is unfortunate enough not to succeed, he is then Charged with
Temerity, and, perhaps, want of Conduct. The former of these Aspersions,
I am confident, can never be laid to my Charge, and if I am fortunate to
Surmount all the Dangers we meet with, the latter will never be brought
in Question; altho' I must own that I have engaged more among the Islands
and Shoals upon this Coast than perhaps in prudence I ought to have done
with a single Ship* (* Cook was so impressed with the danger of one ship
alone being engaged in these explorations, that in his subsequent voyages
he asked for, and obtained, two vessels.) and every other thing
considered. But if I had not I should not have been able to give any
better account of the one half of it than if I had never seen it; at
best, I should not have been able to say wether it was Mainland or
Islands; and as to its produce, that we should have been totally ignorant
of as being inseparable with the other; and in this case it would have
been far more satisfaction to me never to have discover'd it. But it is
time I should have done with this Subject, which at best is but
disagreeable, and which I was lead into on reflecting on our late
Dangers.

In the P.M., as the wind would not permit us to sail out by the same
Channel as we came in, neither did I care to move until the pinnace was
in better repair, I sent the Master with all the other Boats to the Reef
to get such refreshments as he could find, and in the meantime the
Carpenters were repairing the pinnace. Variations by the Amplitude and
Azimuth in the morning 4 degrees 9 minutes Easterly; at noon Latitude
observed 12 degrees 38 minutes South, Longitude in 216 degrees 45 minutes
West. It being now about low water, I and some other of the officers went
to the Masthead to see what we could discover. Great part of the reef
without us was dry, and we could see an Opening in it about two Leagues
farther to the South-East than the one we came in by; we likewise saw 2
large spots of sand to the Southward within the Reef, but could see
nothing to the Northward between it and the Main. On the Mainland within
us was a pretty high promontary, which I called Cape Weymouth (Latitude
12 degrees 42 minutes South, Longitude 217 degrees 15 minutes); and on
the North-West side of this Cape is a Bay, which I called Weymouth Bay.*
(* Viscount Weymouth was one of the Secretaries of State when the
Endeavour sailed.)

Saturday, 18th. Gentle breezes at East and East-South-East. At 4 P.M. the
Boats return'd from the Reef with about 240 pounds of Shell-fish, being
the Meat of large Cockles, exclusive of the Shells. Some of these Cockles
are as large as 2 Men can move, and contain about 20 pounds of Meat, very
good. At 6 in the morning we got under sail, and stood away to the
North-West, as we could not expect a wind to get out to Sea by the same
Channel as we came in without waiting perhaps a long time for it, nor was
it advisable at this time to go without the Shoals, least we should by
them be carried so far off the Coast as not to be able to determine
wether or no New Guinea joins to or makes a part of this land. This
doubtful point I had from my first coming upon the Coast, determined, if
Possible, to clear up; I now came to a fix'd resolution to keep the Main
land on board, let the Consequence be what it will, and in this all the
Officers concur'd. In standing to the North-West we met with very
irregular soundings, from 10 to 27 fathoms, varying 5 or 6 fathoms almost
every Cast of the Lead. However, we keept on having a Boat ahead
sounding. A little before noon we passed a low, small, sandy Isle, which
we left on our Starboard side at the distance of 2 Miles. At the same
time we saw others, being part of large Shoals above water, away to the
North-East and between us and the Main land. At Noon we were by
observation in the Latitude of 12 degrees 28 minutes South, and 4 or 5
Leagues from the Main, which extended from South by West to North 71
degrees West, and some Small Islands extending from North 40 degrees West
to North 54 degrees West, the Main or outer Reef seen from the Masthead
away to the North-East.

[Amongst Shoals off Cape Grenville.]

Sunday, 19th. Gentle breezes at South-East by East and Clear wether. At 2
P.M., as we were steering North-West by North, saw a large shoal right
ahead, extending 3 or 4 points on each bow, upon which we hauld up
North-North-East and North-East by North, in order to get round to North
Point of it, which we reached by 4 o'clock, and then Edged away to the
westward, and run between the North end of this Shoal and another, which
lays 2 miles to the Northward of it, having a Boat all the time ahead
sounding. Our depth of Water was very irregular, from 22 to 8 fathoms. At
1/2 past 6 we Anchor'd in 13 fathoms; the Northermost of the Small
Islands mentioned at Noon bore West 1/2 South, distant 3 Miles. These
Islands, which are known in the Chart by the name of Forbes's Isles,* (*
Admiral John Forbes was a Commissioner of Longitude in 1768, and had been
a Lord of the Admiralty from 1756 to 1763.) lay about 5 Leagues from the
Main, which here forms a moderate high point, which we called Bolt head,
from which the Land trends more westerly, and is all low, sandy Land, but
to the Southward it is high and hilly, even near the Sea. At 6 A.M. we
got under sail, and directed our Course for an Island which lay but a
little way from the Main, and bore from us at this time North 40 degrees
West, distant 5 Leagues; but we were soon interrupted in our Course by
meeting with Shoals, but by the help of 2 Boats ahead and a good lookout
at the Mast head we got at last into a fair Channel, which lead us down
to the Island, having a very large Shoal on our Starboard side and
several smaller ones betwixt us and the Main land. In this Channel we had
from 20 to 30 fathoms. Between 11 and 12 o'Clock we hauld round the
North-East side of the Island, leaving it between us and the Main from
which it is distant 7 or 8 Miles. This Island is about a League in
Circuit and of a moderate height, and is inhabited; to the North-West of
it are several small, low Islands and Keys, which lay not far from the
Main, and to the Northward and Eastward lay several other Islands and
Shoals, so that we were now incompassed on every side by one or the
other, but so much does a great danger Swallow up lesser ones, that these
once so much dreaded spots were now looked at with less concern. The
Boats being out of their Stations, we brought too to wait for them. At
Noon our Latitude by observation was 12 degrees 0 minutes South,
Longitude in 217 degrees 25 minutes West; depth of Water 14 fathoms;
Course and distance sail'd, reduced to a strait line, since yesterday
Noon is North 29 degrees West, 32 Miles. The Main land within the above
Islands forms a point, which I call Cape Grenville* (* George Grenville
was First Lord of the Admiralty for a few months in 1763, and afterwards
Prime Minister for two years.) (Latitude 11 degrees 58 minutes, Longitude
217 degrees 38 minutes); between this Cape and the Bolt head is a Bay,
which I Named Temple Bay.* (* Richard Earl Temple, brother of George
Grenville, was First Lord of the Admiralty in 1756.) East 1/2 North, 9
Leagues from Cape Grenville, lay some tolerable high Islands, which I
called Sir Charles Hardy's Isles;* (* Admiral Sir C. Hardy was second in
command in Hawke's great action in Quiberon Bay, 1759.) those which lay
off the Cape I named Cockburn Isles.* (* Admiral George Cockburn was a
Commissioner of Longitude and Comptroller of the Navy when Cook left
England. Off Cape Grenville the Endeavour again got into what is now the
recognised channel along the land inside the reefs.)

[Nearing Cape York, Queensland.]

Monday, 20th. Fresh breezes at East-South-East. About one P.M. the
pinnace having got ahead, and the Yawl we took in Tow, we fill'd and
Steer'd North by West, for some small Islands we had in that direction.
After approaching them a little nearer we found them join'd or connected
together by a large Reef; upon this we Edged away North-West, and left
them on our Starboard hand, steering between them and the Island laying
off the Main, having a fair and Clear Passage; Depth of Water from 15 to
23 fathoms. At 4 we discover'd some low Islands and Rocks bearing
West-North-West, which we stood directly for. At half Past 6 we Anchor'd
on the North-East side of the Northermost, in 16 fathoms, distant from
the Island one Mile. This Isle lay North-West 4 Leagues from Cape
Grenville. On the Isles we saw a good many Birds, which occasioned my
calling them Bird Isles. Before and at Sunset we could see the Main land,
which appear'd all very low and sandy, Extends as far to the Northward as
North-West by North, and some Shoals, Keys, and low sandy Isles away to
the North-East of us. At 6 A.M. we got again under sail, with a fresh
breeze at East, and stood away North-North-West for some low Islands* (*
Boydong Keys.) we saw in that direction; but we had not stood long upon
this Course before we were obliged to haul close upon a wind in Order to
weather a Shoal which we discover'd on our Larboard bow, having at the
same time others to the Eastward of us. By such time as we had weathered
the Shoal to Leeward we had brought the Islands well upon our Leebow; but
seeing some Shoals spit off from them, and some rocks on our Starboard
bow, which we did not discover until we were very near them, made me
afraid to go to windward of the Islands; wherefore we brought too, and
made the signal for the pinnace, which was a head, to come on board,
which done, I sent her to Leeward of the Islands, with Orders to keep
along the Edge off the Shoal, which spitted off from the South side of
the Southermost Island. The Yawl I sent to run over the Shoals to look
for Turtle, and appointed them a Signal to make in case they saw many; if
not, she was to meet us on the other side of the Island. As soon as the
pinnace had got a proper distance from us we wore, and stood After her,
and run to Leeward of the Islands, where we took the Yawl in Tow, she
having seen only one small Turtle, and therefore made no Stay upon the
Shoal. Upon this Island, which is only a Small Spott of Land, with some
Trees upon it, we saw many Hutts and habitations of the Natives, which we
supposed come over from the Main to these Islands (from which they are
distant about 5 Leagues) to Catch Turtle at the time these Animals come
ashore to lay their Eggs. Having got the Yawl in Tow, we stood away after
the pinnace North-North-East and North by East to 2 other low Islands,
having 2 Shoals, which we could see without and one between us and the
Main. At Noon we were about 4 Leagues from the Main land, which we could
see Extending to the Northward as far as North-West by North, all low,
flat, and Sandy. Our Latitude by observation was 11 degrees 23 minutes
South, Longitude in 217 degrees 46 minutes West, and Course and distance
sail'd since Yesterday at Noon North 22 degrees West, 40 Miles; soundings
from 14 to 23 fathoms. But these are best seen upon the Chart, as
likewise the Islands, Shoals, etc., which are too Numerous to be
Mentioned singly.* (* It is very difficult to follow Cook's track after
entering Providential Channel to this place. The shoals and islands were
so confusing that their positions are very vaguely laid down on Cook's
chart. It is easy to imagine how slow was his progress and tortuous his
course, with a boat ahead all the time constantly signalling shallow
water. Nothing is more trying to officers and men.)

Tuesday, 21st. Winds at East by South and East-South-East, fresh breeze.
By one o'Clock we had run nearly the length of the Southermost of the 2
Islands before mentioned, and finding that we could not well go to
windward of them without carrying us too far from the Main land, we bore
up, and run to Leeward, where we found a fair open passage. This done, we
steer'd North by West, in a parrallel direction with the Main land,
leaving a small Island between us and it, and some low sandy Isles and
Shoals without us, all of which we lost sight of by 4 o'Clock; neither
did we see any more before the sun went down, at which time the farthest
part of the Main in sight bore North-North-West 1/2 West. Soon after this
we Anchor'd in 13 fathoms, soft Ground, about five Leagues from the Land,
where we lay until day light, when we got again under sail, having first
sent the Yawl ahead to sound. We steer'd North-North-West by Compass from
the Northermost land in sight; Variation 3 degrees 6 minutes East. Seeing
no danger in our way we took the Yawl in Tow, and made all the Sail we
could until 8 o'Clock, at which time we discover'd Shoals ahead and on
our Larboard bow, and saw that the Northermost land, which we had taken
to be a part of the Main, was an Island, or Islands,* (*Now called Mount
Adolphus Islands.) between which and the Main their appeared to be a good
Passage thro' which we might pass by running to Leeward of the Shoals on
our Larboard bow, which was now pretty near us. Whereupon we wore and
brought too, and sent away the Pinnace and Yawl to direct us clear of the
Shoals, and then stood after them. Having got round the South-East point
of the Shoal we steer'd North-West along the South-West, or inside of it,
keeping a good lookout at the Masthead, having another Shoal on our
Larboard side; but we found a good Channel of a Mile broad between them,
wherein were from 10 to 14 fathoms. At 11 o'Clock, being nearly the
length of the Islands above mentioned, and designing to pass between them
and the Main, the Yawl, being thrown a stern by falling in upon a part of
the Shoal, She could not get over. We brought the Ship too, and Sent away
the Long boat (which we had a stern, and rigg'd) to keep in Shore upon
our Larboard bow, and the Pinnace on our Starboard; for altho' there
appear'd nothing in the Passage, yet I thought it necessary to take this
method, because we had a strong flood, which carried us on end very fast,
and it did not want much of high water. As soon as the Boats were ahead
we stood after them, and got through by noon, at which time we were by
observation in the Latitude of 10 degrees 36 minutes 30 seconds South.
The nearest part of the Main, and which we soon after found to be the
Northermost,* (* Cape York, the northernmost point of Australia.) bore
West southerly, distant 3 or 4 Miles; the Islands which form'd the
passage before mentioned extending from North to North 75 degrees East,
distant 2 or 3 Miles. At the same time we saw Islands at a good distance
off extending from North by West to West-North-West, and behind them
another chain of high land, which we likewise judged to be Islands.* (*
The islands around Thursday Island.) The Main land we thought extended as
far as North 71 degrees West; but this we found to be Islands. The point
of the Main, which forms one side of the Passage before mentioned, and
which is the Northern Promontory of this Country, I have named York Cape,
in honour of his late Royal Highness, the Duke of York.* (* Edward
Augustus, Duke of York and Albany, was a brother of George III.) It lies
in the Longitude of 218 degrees 24 minutes West, the North point in the
Latitude of 10 degrees 37 minutes South, and the East point in 10 degrees
41 minutes. The land over and to the Southward of this last point is
rather low and very flatt as far inland as the Eye could reach, and looks
barren. To the Southward of the Cape the Shore forms a large open bay,
which I called Newcastle bay, wherein are some small, low Islands and
shoals, and the land all about it is very low, flatt, and sandy. The land
on the Northern part of the Cape is rather more hilly, and the shore
forms some small bays, wherein there appear'd to be good Anchorage, and
the Vallies appear'd to be tolerably well Cloathed with wood. Close to
the East point of the Cape are 3 small Islands, and a small Ledge of
rocks spitting off from one of them. There is also an Island laying close
to the North Point. The other Islands before spoke of lay about 4 Miles
without these; only two of them are of any extent. The Southermost is the
largest, and much higher than any part of the Main land. On the
North-West side of this Island seem'd to be good Anchorage, and Vallies
that to all appearance would afford both wood and fresh Water. These
Isles are known in the Chart by the name of York Isles.* (* Now called
Mount Adolphus Islands.) To the Southward and South-East of them, and
even to the Eastward and Northward, are several low Islands, rocks, and
Shoals. Our depth of Water in sailing between them and the Main was 12,
13, and 14 fathoms.* (* In this channel is the dangerous rock on which
the steamship Quetta was wrecked, with such terrible loss of life, in
1890. By the Endeavour's track she must have passed very near it.)

[Land upon Possession Island.]

Wednesday, 22nd. Gentle breezes at East by South and clear weather. We
had not steer'd above 3 or 4 Miles along shore to the westward before we
discover'd the land ahead to be Islands detached by several Channels from
the main land; upon this we brought too to Wait for the Yawl, and called
the other Boats on board, and after giving them proper instructions, sent
them away again to lead us thro' the Channell next the Main, and as soon
as the Yawl was on board made sail after them with the Ship. Soon after
we discover'd rocks and Shoals in this Channell, upon which I made the
Signal for the boats to lead thro' the next Channel to the Northward* (*
This led to Endeavour Strait, but the recognised track is the channel
farther north.) laying between the Islands, which they accordingly did,
we following with the Ship, and had not less than 5 fathoms; and this in
the narrowest part of the Channel, which was about a Mile and a 1/2 broad
from Island to Island. At 4 o'Clock we Anchor'd about a Mile and a 1/2 or
2 Miles within the Entrance in 6 1/2 fathoms, clear ground, distance from
the Islands on each side of us one Mile, the Main land extending away to
the South-West; the farthest point of which we could see bore from us
South 48 degrees West, and the Southermost point of the Islands, on the
North-West side of the Passage, bore South 76 degrees West. Between these
2 points we could see no land, so that we were in great hopes that we had
at last found out a Passage into the Indian seas; but in order to be
better informed I landed with a party of men, accompanied by Mr. Banks
and Dr. Solander, upon the Islands which lies at the South-East point of
the Passage. Before and after we Anchor'd we saw a Number of People upon
this Island, Arm'd in the same manner as all the others we have seen,
Except one man, who had a bow and a bundle of Arrows, the first we have
seen upon this Coast. From the appearance of the people we expected they
would have opposed our landing; but as we approached the shore they all
made off, and left us in peaceable possession of as much of the Island as
served our purpose. After landing I went upon the highest hill, which,
however, was of no great height, yet no less than twice or thrice the
height of the Ship's Mastheads; but I could see from it no land between
South-West and West-South-West, so that I did not doubt but there was a
passage. I could see plainly that the lands laying to the North-West of
this passage were compos'd of a number of Islands of Various extent, both
for height and Circuit, ranged one behind another as far to the Northward
and Westward as I could see, which could not be less than 12 or 14
Leagues.

Having satisfied myself of the great Probability of a passage, thro'
which I intend going with the Ship, and therefore may land no more upon
this Eastern coast of New Holland, and on the Western side I can make no
new discovery, the honour of which belongs to the Dutch Navigators, but
the Eastern Coast from the Latitude of 38 degrees South down to this
place, I am confident, was never seen or Visited by any European before
us; and notwithstanding I had in the Name of his Majesty taken possession
of several places upon this Coast, I now once More hoisted English
Colours, and in the Name of His Majesty King George the Third took
possession of the whole Eastern coast from the above Latitude down to
this place by the Name of New Wales,* (* The Admiralty copy, as well as
that belonging to Her Majesty, calls it New South Wales. The island where
the ceremony was performed was named on Cook's chart Possession Island,
and is still so called.) together with all the Bays, Harbours, Rivers,
and Islands, situated upon the said Coast; after which we fired 3 Volleys
of small Arms, which were answer'd by the like number from the Ship.

This done, we set out for the Ship, but were some time in getting on
board on account of a very Rapid Ebb Tide, which set North-East out of
the Passage. Ever since we came in amongst the Shoals this last time we
have found a Moderate Tide; the flood setting to the North-West and Ebb
to the South-East; at this place is high water at full and change of the
moon, about 1 or 2 o'Clock, and riseth and falleth upon a perpendicular
about 10 or 12 feet. We saw upon all the Adjacent Lands and Islands a
great number of smokes--a certain sign that they are inhabited--and we
have daily seen smokes on every part of the Coast we have lately been
upon. Between 7 and 8 o'Clock a.m. we saw several naked people, all or
most of them Women, down upon the beach picking up Shells, etc.; they had
not a single rag of any kind of Cloathing upon them, and both these and
those we saw yesterday were in every respect the same sort of People we
have seen everywhere upon the Coast. 2 or 3 of the Men we saw Yesterday
had on pretty large breast plates, which we supposed were made of pearl
Oyster Shells; this was a thing, as well as the Bow and Arrows, we had
not seen before. At low water, which hapned about 10 o'Clock, we got
under sail, and stood to the South-West, with a light breeze at East,
which afterwards veer'd to North by East, having the Pinnace ahead; depth
of Water from 6 to 10 fathoms, except in one place, were we passed over a
Bank of 5 fathoms. At Noon Possession Island, at the South-East entrance
of the Passage, bore North 53 degrees East, distant 4 Leagues; the
Western extream of the Main land in sight South 43 degrees West, distant
4 or 5 Leagues, being all exceeding low. The South-West point of the
largest Island* (* Prince of Wales Island.) on the North-West side of the
passage bore North 71 degrees West, distant 8 Miles; this point I named
Cape Cornwall (Latitude 10 degrees 43 minutes South, Longitude 218
degrees 59 minutes West),* (* This longitude is 70 minutes too far west,
and one of the worst given in the Journal. There were no observations,
and the dead reckoning among the shoals was difficult to keep.) and some
low Islands lying about the Middle of the Passage, which I called
Wallace's Isles, bore West by South 1/2 South, distance about 2 Leagues.
Our Latitude by Observation was 10 degrees 46 minutes South.

[In Endeavour Strait, Torres Strait.]

Thursday, 23rd. In the P.M. had little wind and Variable, with which and
the Tide of Flood we keept advancing to the West-North-West; depth of
Water 8, 7, and 5 fathoms. At 1/2 past 1 the pinnace, which was ahead,
made the Signal for Shoal Water, upon which we Tackt and sent away the
Yawl to sound also, and then Tack'd again, and stood after them with the
Ship; 2 hours after this they both at once made the Signal for having
Shoal water. I was afraid to stand on for fear of running aground at that
time of the Tide, and therefore came to an Anchor in 1/4 less 7 fathoms,
sandy ground. Wallice's Islands bore South by West 1/2 West, distant 5 or
6 Miles, the Islands to the Northward extending from North 73 degrees
East to North 10 degrees East, and a small island* (* Booby Island.) just
in sight bearing North-West 1/2 West. Here we found the flood Tide set to
the Westward and Ebb to the Contrary. After we had come to Anchor I sent
away the Master with the Long boat to sound, who, upon his return in the
evening, reported that there was a bank stretching North and South, upon
which were 3 fathoms Water, and behind it 7 fathoms. We had it Calm all
Night and until 9 in the morning, at which time we weigh'd, with a light
breeze at South-South-East, and steer'd North-West by West for the Small
Island above mentioned, having first sent the Boats ahead to sound; depth
of Water 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, and 3 fathoms when upon the Bank,* (* The
Endeavour Strait is now little used, on account of this great bank, which
nearly bars its western part. There is, however, deeper water than Cook
found, a few miles to the southward; but it is just the difficulty of
finding this narrow pass, so far from land, and the fact that there is a
deep though narrow channel north of Prince of Wales Island, that has
caused it to be abandoned. The passage of Torres Strait is, however,
still an anxious bit of navigation.) it being now the last Quarter Ebb.
At this time the most Northermost Islands we had in sight bore North 9
degrees East; the South-West point of the largest Islands on the
North-West side of the Passage, which I named Cape Cornwall, bore East;
distant 3 Leagues. This bank, at least so much as we sounded, extends
nearly North and South, how far I cannot say; its breadth, however, is
not more than 1/4 or at most 1/2 a Mile. Being over the Bank, we deepned
our water to a 1/4 less 7 fathoms, which depth we carried all the way to
the small Island ahead, which we reached by Noon, at which time it bore
South, distant near 1/2 a Mile; depth of Water 5 fathoms. The most
northermost land we had in sight (being part of the same Chain of Islands
we have had to the Northward of us since we entered the Passage) bore
North 71 degrees East; Latitude in, by Observation, 10 degrees 33 minutes
South, Longitude 219 degrees 22 minutes West. In this situation we had no
part of the Main land in sight. Being now near the island, and having but
little wind, Mr. Banks and I landed upon it, and found it to be mostly a
barren rock frequented by Birds, such as Boobies, a few of which we
shott, and occasioned my giving it the name of Booby Island.* (* Booby
Island is now the great landmark for ships making Torres Strait from the
westward. There is a light upon it.) I made but very short stay at this
Island before I return'd to the Ship; in the meantime the wind had got to
the South-West, and although it blow'd but very faint, yet it was
accompanied with a Swell from the same quarter. This, together with other
concuring Circumstances, left me no room to doubt but we had got to the
Westward of Carpentaria, or the Northern extremity of New Holland, and
had now an open Sea to the Westward; which gave me no small satisfaction,
not only because the danger and fatigues of the Voyage was drawing near
to an end, but by being able to prove that New Holland and New Guinea are
2 separate Lands or Islands, which until this day hath been a doubtful
point with Geographers.* (* Luis Vaez de Torres, commanding a Spanish
ship in company with Quiros in 1605, separated from his companion in the
New Hebrides. He afterwards passed through the Strait separating New
Guinea from Australia, which now bears his name. This fact, however, was
little known, as the Spaniards suppressed all account of the voyage; and
though it leaked out later, the report was so vague that it was very much
doubted whether he had really passed this way. On most charts and maps of
the period, New Guinea was shown joined to Australia, and to Cook the
establishment of the Strait may fairly be given. Only the year before
Bougainville, the French navigator, who preceded Cook across the Pacific,
and who was steering across the Coral Sea on a course which would have
led him to Lizard Island, abandoned his search in that direction, after
falling in with two reefs to the eastward of the Barrier, because he
feared falling amongst other shoals, and had no faith whatever in the
reports of the existence of Torres Strait. Had he persevered, he would
have snatched from Cook the honour of the complete exploration of Eastern
Australia, and of the verification of the passage between it and New
Guinea. Bougainville paid dearly for his caution, as he found that
retracing his steps against the trade wind, in order to pass eastward and
northward of New Guinea, occupied such a weary time, that he and his
people were nearly starved before they reached a place of refreshment.)

[Description of Endeavour Strait.]

The North-East entrance of this passage or Strait lies in the Latitude of
10 degrees 27 minutes South, and in the Longitude of 218 degrees 36
minutes West from the Meridian of Greenwich.* (* As before mentioned,
this longitude is over a degree in error. The sun was not available for
lunars until the 24th August, and the first was observed on the 25th,
when the ship was at Booby Island; but the result is not recorded in Mr.
Green's log. Mr. Green was at this time ill. The latitude is a clerical
error for 10.37, which Cook's chart shows, and is nearly correct.) It is
form'd by the Main, or the northern extremity of New Holland, on the
South-East, and by a Congeries of Islands to North-West, which I named
Prince of Wales's Islands. It is very Probable that the Islands extend
quite to New Guinea;* (* This conjecture was very near the truth. The
whole of Torres Strait is obstructed by either islands or reefs that
leave very little passage.) they are of Various Extent both for height
and Circuit, and many of them seem'd to be indifferently well Cloath'd
with wood, etc., and, from the smokes we saw, some, if not all of them,
must be inhabited. It is also very probable that among these Islands are
as good, if not better, passages than the one we have come thro', altho'
one need hardly wish for a better, was the access to it from the Eastward
less dangerous; but this difficulty will remain until some better way is
found out than the one we came, which no doubt may be done was it ever to
become an object to be looked for.* (* It is the western and not the
eastern approach of Endeavour Strait that forms the difficulty, now the
locality has been charted, for vessels of deeper draught than the
Endeavour; though for small craft, as Cook says, you can hardly wish for
a better.) The northern Extent of the Main or outer reef, which limit or
bounds the Shoals to the Eastward, seems to be the only thing wanting to
Clear up this point; and this was a thing I had neither time nor
inclination to go about, having been already sufficiently harrass'd with
dangers without going to look for more.* (* The east coast of Australia,
which Cook had now followed from end to end, is 2000 miles in extent. He
took four months over it, much less time than he had given to New
Zealand; but this is easily accounted for. His people were getting worn
out, and he was haunted by fears of not getting off the coast before the
North-West monsoon set in, which would have been a foul wind for him in
getting from Torres Straits to Batavia, and his provisions were running
short. Besides this, there was the grave doubt whether Australia and New
Guinea were really separated. If this turned out to be false, there was a
long round to make, back to the eastern extremity of the latter, and the
voyage to Batavia would have been infinitely extended. Considering these
circumstances, Cook's exploration of the coast was wonderful, and the
charts attached to this book attest the skill and unwearied pains taken
in mapping it from such a cursory glance. He only stopped at four places:
Botany Bay, Bustard Bay, Thirsty Sound, and the Endeavour River; and from
the neighbourhood of these, with the view obtained as he coasted along,
he had to form his opinion of the country--an opinion, as we shall see,
singularly correct.)

This passage, which I have named Endeavour Straits, after the Name of the
Ship, is in length North-East and South-West 10 Leagues, and about 5
leagues broad, except at the North-East entrance, where it is only 2
Miles broad by reason of several small Islands which lay there, one of
which, called Possession Island, is of a Moderate height and Circuit;
this we left between us and the Main, passing between it and 2 Small
round Islands, which lay North-West 2 Miles from it. There are also 2
Small low Islands, called Wallice's Isles,* (* These are probably called
after Captain Wallis, who made a voyage across the Pacific in the Dolphin
in 1767, and discovered Tahiti.) laying in the Middle of the South-West
entrance, which we left to the southward; the depth of Water we found in
the Straits was from 4 to 9 fathoms. Every where good Anchorage, only
about 2 Leagues to the Northward of Wallice's Islands is a Bank, whereon
is not more than 3 fathoms at low Water, but probable there might be
found more was it sought for. I have not been particular in describing
this Strait, no more than I have been in pointing out the respective
Situations of the Islands, Shoals, etc., on the Coast of New Wales; for
these I refer to the Chart, where they are deliniated with all the
accuracy that Circumstances would admit of.

With respect to the Shoals that lay upon this Coast I must observe, for
the benefit of those who may come after me, that I do not believe the one
1/2 of them are laid down in my Chart; for it would be Absurd to suppose
that we Could see or find them all. And the same thing may in some
Measure be said of the Islands, especially between the Latitude of 20 and
22 degrees, where we saw Islands out at Sea as far as we could
distinguish any thing. However, take the Chart in general, and I believe
it will be found to contain as few Errors as most Sea Charts which have
not undergone a thorough correction.* (* Cook's pride in his chart is
well justified, as its general accuracy is marvellous, when one considers
that he simply sailed along the coast. The great feature of this shore,
however--the Barrier Reef--only appears on it at its northern end, where
its approach to the land caused Cook to make such unpleasant acquaintance
with it. See charts.) The Latitude and Longitude of all, or most of, the
principal head lands, Bays, etc., may be relied on, for we seldom fail'd
of getting an Observation every day to correct our Latitude by, and the
Observation for settling the Longitude were no less Numerous, and made as
often as the Sun and Moon came in play; so that it was impossible for any
Material error to creep into our reckoning in the intermediate times. In
justice to Mr. Green,* (* From this phrase, and from various remarks in
Mr. Green's own log, it would appear that Mr. Green was not very easy to
get on with; but there is no doubt of his unwearied zeal in astronomical
observations.) I must say that he was indefatigable in making and
calculating these observations, which otherwise must have taken up a
great deal of my time, which I could not at all times very well spare;
not only this, but by his instructions several of the petty Officers can
make and calculate these observations almost as well as himself. It is
only by such Means that this method of finding the Longitude at Sea can
be put into universal practice; a Method that we have generally found may
be depended upon within 1/2 a degree, which is a degree of Accuracy more
than sufficient for all Nautical purposes. Would Sea Officers once apply
themselves to the making and calculating these Observations they would
not find them so very difficult as they at first imagine, especially with
the Assistance of the Nautical Almanack and Astronomical Ephemeris, by
the help of which the Calculation for finding the Longitude takes up but
little more time than that of an Azimuth for finding the Variation of the
Compass; but unless this Ephemeris is Published for some time to come,
more than either one or 2 Years, it can never be of general use in long
Voyages, and in short Voyages it's not so much wanted.* (* The "Nautical
Almanac" was first published for 1767. That for 1770 was not published
until 1769; but it seems probable that Cook either had proof sheets, or
the manuscript calculations.) Without it the Calculations are Laborious
and discouraging to beginners, and such as are not well vers'd in these
kind of Calculations.

[Account of New South Wales Coast.]

SOME ACCOUNT OF NEW WALES.* (* Called in Admiralty and the Queen's Copy
New South Wales. It would appear that for this part of the voyage Mr.
Corner's copy was the first written, and that Cook's first idea was to
christen the country New Wales.)

In the Course of this Journal I have at different times made mention of
the Appearance or Aspect of the face of the Country, the Nature of the
Soil, its produce, etc. By the first it will appear that to the Southward
of 33 or 34 degrees the land in general is low and level, with very few
Hills or Mountains; further to the Northward it may in some places be
called a Hilly, but hardly anywhere can be called a Mountainous, Country,
for the Hills and Mountains put together take up but a small part of the
Surface in Comparison to what the Planes and Valleys do which intersect
or divide these Hills and Mountains. It is indifferently well water'd,
even in the dry Seasons, with small brooks and Springs, but no great
Rivers, unless it be in the Wet Season, when the low lands and Vallies
near the Sea, I do suppose, are mostly laid under Water. The Small Brooks
may then become large Rivers; but this can only happen with the Tropick.
It was only in Thirsty Sound that we could find no fresh Water, and that
no doubt was owing to the Country being there very much intersected with
Salt Creeks and Mangrove land.

The low land by the Sea, and even as far in land as we were, is for the
most part friable, loose, sandy Soil yet indifferently fertile, and
Cloathed with woods, long grass, shrubs, plants, etc. The Mountains or
Hills are checquer'd with woods and Lawns; some of the Hills are wholy
cover'd with Flourishing Trees; others but thinly, and the few that are
upon them are small, and the spot of Lawns or Savannahs are rocky and
barren, especially to the Northward, where the Country did not afford or
produce near the Vegetation that it does to the Southward, nor were the
Trees in the Woods half so tall and stout. The Woods do not produce any
great variety of Trees; there are only 2 or 3 sorts that can be called
Timber. The largest is the gum Tree, which grows all over the country;
the wood of this Tree is too hard and ponderous for most common uses. The
Tree which resembles our Pines I saw nowhere in perfection but in Botany
Bay; this wood, as I have before observed, is something of the same
Nature as American Live Oak; in short, most of the large Trees in this
Country are of a hard and ponderous nature, and could not be applied to
many purposes. Here are several sorts of the Palm kind, Mangrove, and
several other sorts of small Trees and Shrubs quite unknown to me,
besides a very great number of Plants hitherto unknown; but these things
are wholy out of my way to describe, nor will this be of any loss, since
not only plants, but every thing that can be of use to the Learned World
will be very accurately described by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander. The Land
naturally produces hardly anything fit for Man to eat, and the Natives
know nothing of Cultivation. There are, indeed, growing wild in the wood
a few sorts of Fruit (the most of them unknown to us), which when ripe do
not eat amiss, one sort especially, which we called Apples, being about
the size of a Crab Apple it is black and pulpey when ripe, and tastes
like a Damson; it hath a large hard stone or Kernel, and grows on Trees
or Shrubs.* (* The Black Apple, or Sapota Australis.)

In the Northern parts of the Country, as about Endeavour River, and
probably in many other places, the Boggy or watery Lands produce Taara or
Cocos,* (* A species of Taro, Colocasia macrorhiza.) which, when properly
cultivated, are very good roots, without which they are hardly eatable;
the Tops, however, make very good greens.

Land Animals are scarce, so far as we know confin'd to a very few
species; all that we saw I have before mentioned. The sort which is in
the greatest Plenty is the Kangooroo or Kanguru, so called by the
Natives; we saw a good many of them about Endeavour River, but kill'd
only 3, which we found very good Eating. Here are likewise Lizards,
Snakes, Scorpions, Centapees, etc., but not in any plenty. Tame Animals
they have none but Dogs, and of these we saw but one, and therefore must
be very scarce, probably they eat them faster than they breed them; we
should not have seen this one had he not made us frequent Visits while we
lay in Endeavour River.

The land Fowls are Bustards, Eagles, Hawks, Crows, such as we have in
England, Cockatoes of 2 sorts, White and Brown, very beautiful Birds of
the Parrot kind, such as Lorryquets, etc., Pidgeons, Doves, Quails, and
several sorts of smaller birds. The Sea and Water Fowls are Herons,
Boobies, Noddies, Guls, Curlews, Ducks, Pelicans, etc., and when Mr.
Banks and Mr. Gore where in the Country, at the head of Endeavour River,
they saw and heard in the Night great numbers of Geese. The Sea is
indifferently well stocked with fish of Various sorts, such as Sharks,
Dog-fish, Rockfish, Mullets, Breams, Cavallies, Mack'rel, old wives,
Leather Jackets, Five Fingers,* (* Old wives are Enoploxus Armatus;
Leather jackets, Monacanthus; Five fingers, Chilodactylus.) Sting rays,
Whip rays, etc., all excellent in their kind. The Shell fish are Oysters
of 3 or 4 sorts, viz., Rock Oysters and Mangrove Oysters, which are
small, Pearl Oysters and Mud Oysters; these last are the best and Largest
I ever saw. Cockles and Clams of several sorts, many of those that are
found upon the Reefs are of a prodigious size, Craw fish, Crabs, Muscles,
and a variety of other sorts. Here are also upon the Shoals and Reefs
great Numbers of the finest Green Turtle in the world, and in the River
and Salt Creeks are some Aligators.

[Australian Natives.]

The Natives of this Country are of a middle Stature, streight Bodied and
Slender limb'd; their Skins the Colour of Wood soot, their Hair mostly
black, some Lank and others curled; they all wear it Cropt Short; their
Beards, which are generally black, they likewise crop short, or Singe
off. There features are far from being disagreeable, and their Voices are
soft and Tunable. They go quite Naked, both Men and Women, without any
manner of Cloathing whatever; even the Women do not so much as cover
their privities, altho' None of us was ever very near any of their Women,
one Gentleman excepted, yet we are all of us as well satisfied of this as
if we had lived among them. Notwithstanding we had several interviews
with the Men while we lay in Endeavour River, yet, wether through
Jealousy or disregard, they never brought any of their women along with
them to the Ship, but always left them on the Opposite side of the River,
where we had frequent Opportunities viewing them thro' our Glasses. They
wear as Ornaments, Necklaces made of Shells, Bracelets, or Hoops, about
their Arms, made mostly of Hair Twisted and made like a Cord Hoop; these
they wear tight about the upper parts of their Arms, and some have
Girdles made in the same manner. The Men wear a bone, about 3 or 4 Inches
long and a finger's thick, run thro' the Bridge* (* The cartilage of the
nostril. Banks mentions that the bluejackets called this queer ornament
the "spritsail yard.") of their Nose; they likewise have holes in their
Ears for Ear Rings, but we never saw them wear any; neither are all the
other Ornaments wore in Common, for we have seen as many without as with
them. Some of these we saw on Possession Island wore breast plates, which
we supposed were made of Mother of Pearl Shells. Many of them paint their
Bodies and faces with a Sort of White paste or Pigment; this they apply
different ways, each according to his fancy.

Their offensive weapons are Darts; some are only pointed at one end,
others are barb'd, some with wood, others with Stings of rays, and some
with Sharks' Teeth, etc.; these last are stuck fast on with Gum. They
throw the Darts with only one hand, in the doing of which they make use
of a piece of wood about 3 feet long, made thin like the blade of a
Cutlass, with a little hook at one End to take hold of the End of the
dart, and at the other end is fix'd a thin piece of bone about 3 or 4
Inches long; the use of this is, I believe, to keep the dart steady, and
to make it quit the hand in a proper direction. By the helps of these
throwing sticks, as we call them, they will hit a mark at the Distance of
40 or 50 yards, with almost, if not as much, Certainty as we can do with
a Musquet, and much more so than with a ball.* (* The invention of these
throwing sticks, and of the Boomerang, is sufficient to prove the
intelligence of the Australian aborigines.) These throwing sticks we at
first took for wooden swords, and perhaps on some occasions they may use
them as such; that is, when all their darts are expended. Be this as it
may, they never Travel without both them and their Darts, not for fear of
Enemies, but for killing of Game, etc., as I shall show hereafter. There
defensive weapons are Targets, made of wood; but these we never saw used
but once in Botany Bay.

I do not look upon them to be a warlike people; on the contrary, I think
them a Timerous and inoffensive race, no ways inclined to Cruelty, as
appear'd from their behaviour to one of our people in Endeavour River,
which I have before mentioned, neither are they very numerous. They live
in small parties along by the Sea Coast, the banks of Lakes, Rivers,
Creeks, etc. They seem to have no fixed habitation, but move about from
place to place like wild beasts in search of Food, and, I believe, depend
wholy upon the Success of the present day for their Subsistance. They
have wooden fish Gigs, with 2, 3, or 4 prongs, each very ingeniously
made, with which they strike fish. We have also seen them strike both
fish and birds with their Darts. With these they likewise kill other
Animals; they have also wooden Harpoons for striking Turtle, but of these
I believe they get but few, except at the seasons they come ashore to
lay. In short, these people live wholy by fishing and hunting, but mostly
by the former, for we never saw one Inch of Cultivated land in the whole
Country. They know, however, the use of Taara, and sometimes eat them; we
do not know that they Eat anything raw, but roast or broil all they eat
on slow small fires. Their Houses are mean, small Hovels, not much bigger
than an Oven, made of Peices of Sticks, Bark, Grass, etc., and even these
are seldom used but in the Wet seasons, for in the daytimes we know they
as often sleep in the Open Air as anywhere else. We have seen many of
their Sleeping places, where there has been only some branches or peices
of Bark, grass, etc., about a foot high on the Windward side.

[Australian Canoes.]

Their Canoes are as mean as can be conceived, especially to the
Southward, where all we saw were made of one peice of the Bark of Trees
about 12 or 14 feet long, drawn or Tied together at one end. As I have
before made mention, these Canoes will not Carry above 2 people, in
general there is never more than one in them; but, bad as they are, they
do very well for the purpose they apply them to, better than if they were
larger, for as they draw but little water they go in them upon the Mud
banks, and pick up Shell fish, etc., without going out of the Canoe. The
few Canoes we saw to the Northward were made out of a Log of wood
hollow'd out, about 14 feet long and very narrow, with outriggers; these
will carry 4 people. During our whole stay in Endeavour River we saw but
one Canoe, and had great reason to think that the few people that resided
about that place had no more; this one served them to cross the River and
to go a Fishing in, etc. They attend the Shoals, and flatts, one where or
another, every day at low water to gather Shell fish, or whatever they
can find to eat, and have each a little bag to put what they get in; this
bag is made of net work. They have not the least knowledge of Iron or any
other Metal that we know of; their working Tools must be made of Stone,
bone, and Shells; those made of the former are very bad, if I may judge
from one of their Adzes I have seen.

Bad and mean as their Canoes are, they at Certain seasons of the Year (so
far as we know) go in them to the most distant Islands which lay upon the
Coast, for we never landed upon one but what we saw signs of People
having been there before. We were surprized to find Houses, etc., upon
Lizard Island, which lies 5 Leagues from the nearest part of the Main; a
distance we before thought they could not have gone in their Canoes.

The Coast of this Country, at least so much of it as lays to the
Northward of 25 degrees of Latitude, abounds with a great Number of fine
bays and Harbours, which are Shelter'd from all winds; but the Country
itself, so far as we know, doth not produce any one thing that can become
an Article in Trade to invite Europeans to fix a settlement upon it.
However, this Eastern side is not that barren and miserable country that
Dampier and others have described the Western side to be. We are to
consider that we see this country in the pure state of nature; the
Industry of Man has had nothing to do with any part of it, and yet we
find all such things as nature hath bestow'd upon it in a flourishing
state. In this Extensive Country it can never be doubted but what most
sorts of Grain, Fruit, roots, etc., of every kind would flourish here
were they once brought hither, planted and Cultivated by the hands of
Industry; and here are Provender for more Cattle, at all seasons of the
Year, than ever can be brought into the Country.* (* It says a good deal
for Cook's penetration that he wrote like this, for the coast of
Australia is not promising, especially in the dry season; and coming as
he did from the more apparently fertile countries of Tahiti and New
Zealand, Australia must have appeared but a barren land.) When one
considers the Proximity of this Country with New Guinea, New Britain, and
several other Islands which produce Cocoa Nutts and many other fruits
proper for the support of man, it seems strange that they should not long
ago be Transplanted here; by its not being done it should seem that the
Natives of this Country have no commerce with their Neighbours, the New
Guineans.* (* The climate is too dry for the cocoanut palm.) It is very
probable that they are a different people, and speak a different
Language. For the advantage of such as want to Clear up this point I
shall add a small Vocabulary of a few Words in the New Holland Language
which we learnt when in Endeavour River.* (* The languages of the
different tribes differ very much. This results from the continual state
of war in which they live, as they have no communication the one with the
other.)

COLUMN 1: ENGLISH.
COLUMN 2: NEW HOLLAND.

The Head : Whageegee.
The Hair of the head : Morye or More.
The Eyes : Meul.
The Ears : Melea.
The Lips : Yembe or Jembi.
The Teeth : Mulere or Moile.
The Chinn : Jaeal.
The Beard : Waller.
The Tongue : Unjar.
The Nose : Bonjoo.
The Naval : Toolpoor or Julpur.
The Penis : Keveil or Kerrial.
The Scrotum : Coonal or Kunnol.
The Arms : Aw or Awl.
The Hand : Marigal.
The Thumb : Eboorbalga.
The Fore, Middle and Ring fingers : Egalbaiga.
Little Finger : Nakil or Eboonakil.
The Thighs : Coman.
The Knees : Ponga.
The Legs : Peegoorgo.
The Feet : Edamal.
The Nails : Kolke or Kulke.
A Stone : Walba.
Sand : Joo'wal, Yowall, or Joralba.
A Rope or Line : Goorgo or Gurka.
Fire : Maianang or Meanang.
The Sun : Galan or Gallan.
The Sky : Kere or Kearre.
A Father : Dunjo.
A Son : Jumurre.
A Man : Bamma or Ba ma.
A Dog : Cotta or Kota.
A Lorryquet : Perpere or Pier-pier.
A Cocatoo : Wanda.
Male Turtle : Poonja or Poinja.
Female : Mamingo.
A great Cockle : Moenjo or Moingo.
Cocos Yams : Maracotu (?).
A Canoe : Maragan.

[Australian Natives.]

From what I have said of the Natives of New Holland they may appear to
some to be the most wretched People upon Earth; but in reality they are
far more happier than we Europeans, being wholy unacquainted not only
with the Superfluous, but with the necessary Conveniences so much sought
after in Europe; they are happy in not knowing the use of them. They live
in a Tranquility which is not disturbed by the Inequality of Condition.
The earth and Sea of their own accord furnishes them with all things
necessary for Life. They covet not Magnificient Houses, Household-stuff,
etc.; they live in a Warm and fine Climate, and enjoy every wholesome
Air, so that they have very little need of Cloathing; and this they seem
to be fully sencible of, for many to whom we gave Cloth, etc., left it
carelessly upon the Sea beach and in the Woods, as a thing they had no
manner of use for; in short, they seem'd to set no Value upon anything we
gave them, nor would they ever part with anything of their own for any
one Article we could offer them. This, in my opinion, Argues that they
think themselves provided with all the necessarys of Life, and that they
have no Superfluities.* (* The native Australians may be happy in their
condition, but they are without doubt among the lowest of mankind.
Confirmed cannibals, they lose no opportunity of gratifying their love of
human flesh. Mothers will kill and eat their own children, and the women
again are often mercilessly illtreated by their lords and masters. There
are no chiefs, and the land is divided into sections, occupied by
families, who consider everything in their district as their own.
Internecine war exists between the different tribes, which are very
small. Their treachery, which is unsurpassed, is simply an outcome of
their savage ideas, and in their eyes is a form of independence which
resents any intrusion on THEIR land, THEIR wild animals, and THEIR rights
generally. In their untutored state they therefore consider that any
method of getting rid of the invader is proper. Both sexes, as Cook
observed, are absolutely nude, and lead a wandering life, with no fixed
abode, subsisting on roots, fruits, and such living things as they can
catch. Nevertheless, although treated by the coarser order of colonists
as wild beasts to be extirpated, those who have studied them have formed
favourable opinions of their intelligence. The more savage side of their
disposition being, however, so very apparent, it is not astonishing that,
brought into contact with white settlers, who equally consider that they
have a right to settle, the aborigines are rapidly disappearing.)

I shall conclude the account of this Country with a few observations on
the Currents and Tides upon the Coast, because I have mentioned in the
Course of this Journal that the latter hath sometimes set one way and
sometimes another, which I shall Endeavour to account for in the best
manner I can. From the Latitude of 32 degrees, or above downwards to
Sandy Cape in the Latitude of 24 degrees 46 minutes, we constantly found
a Current setting to the Southward at the rate of 10 or 15 Miles per Day,
more or less, according to the distance we were from the land, for it
runs stronger in shore than in the Offing. All this time I had not been
able to satisfy myself whether the flood-tide came from the Southward,
Eastward, or Northward, but judged it to come from the South-East; but
the first time we anchor'd upon the coast, which was in the Latitude of
24 degrees 30 minutes, and about 10 Leagues to the South-East of Bustard
Bay, we found there the flood to come from the North-West. On the
Contrary, 30 Leagues further to the North-West, on the South side of
Keppel Bay, we found the Flood to come from the East, and at the Northern
part of the said Bay we found it come from the Northward, but with a much
Slower Motion than the Easterly Tide. Again, on the East side of the Bay
of Inlets we found the flood to set strong to the Westward as far as the
Op'ning of Broad sound, but on the North side of that sound the flood
come with a Slow motion from the North-West; and when at Anchor before
Repulse bay we found the flood to come from the northward. We need only
admit the flood tide to come from the East or South-East, and then all
these seeming Contradictions will be found to be conformable to reason
and experience. It is well known that where there are deep Inlets, large
Creeks, etc., into low lands, that it is not occasioned by fresh water
Rivers; there is a very great indraught of the Flood Tide, the direction
of which will be determin'd according to the possition or direction of
the Coast which forms the Entrance into such Inlets; and this direction
the Tide must follow, let it be ever so contrary to their general Course
out at Sea, and where the Tides are weak, as they are in general upon
this Coast, a large Inlet will, if I may so call it, attract the Flood
tide for many Leagues. Any one need only cast an Eye over the Chart to be
made sencible of what I have advanced. To the Northward of Whitsundays
Passage there are few or no large Inlets, and consequently the Flood sets
to the Northward or North-West, according to the direction of the Coast,
and Ebb the Contrary; but this is to be understood at a little distance
from land, or where there is no Creeks or Inlets, for where such are, be
they ever so small, they draw the flood from the Southward, Eastward, and
Northward, and, as I found by experience, while we lay in Endeavour
River.* (* Cook's reasoning on the course of the flood stream is quite
sound.) Another thing I have observed upon the Tides which ought to be
remarked, which is that there is only one high Tide in 24 Hours, and that
is the night Tide. On the Spring Tides the difference between the
perpendicular rise of the night and day Tides is not less than 3 feet,
which is a great deal where the Tides are so inconsiderable, as they are
here.* (* This difference in the heights of consecutive tides is termed
the diurnal inequality. It results from the tide wave being made up of a
large number of undulations, some caused by the moon, some by the sun;
some occurring twice a day, others only once. It occurs in all parts of
the world, but is inconspicuous on the coasts of Europe. In Australia it
is very marked, and occasions the night tides to be the highest at one
time of the year, when the Endeavour was on the coast, and the day tides
at the other. There are places on the east coast of Australia where the
range of the tide is very great, but Cook did not anchor at any of them.)
This inequality of the Tide I did not observe till we run ashore; perhaps
it is much more so to the Northward than to the Southward. After we had
got within the Reefs the second time we found the Tides more considerable
than at any time before, except in the Bay of Inlets. It may be owing to
the water being confin'd in Channels between the Shoals, but the flood
always set to the North-West to the extremity of New Wales, from thence
West and South-West into the India Seas.

[Historical Notes, East Coast of Australia.]

HISTORICAL NOTES ON THE EAST COAST OF AUSTRALIA.

PREVIOUS to Cook's visit no European, so far as is known, had ever
sighted the East Coast of Australia, or, as it was then called, New
Holland. The Dutch had examined and mapped the shores from the Gulf of
Carpentaria on the north round by the west to Van Dieman's Land or
Tasmania, but had not decided whether the latter was a part of the
mainland or no. Dampier, in 1699, had the intention of passing south to
explore the unknown eastern shore, but never carried it out, confining
his attention to the northern part of the west coast, with which, and
with good reason, he was not favourably impressed.

On all maps of the time, the east coast, from Tasmania to the north, was
shown as a dotted and more or less straight line, Tasmania being joined
at the south, and generally New Guinea at the north.

There is indeed one manuscript known as the Dauphin's Map, a copy of
which is in the British Museum, of the date of about 1540, which shows a
certain amount of the north-east coast, and has been thought by some to
prove that some one had visited it. But an inspection of it shows that it
is far more probably a case of imaginative coast drawing, such as occurs
in other places in the same map, and in many others of the same and later
dates, and there is certainly no record of any voyage to this coast.

After Cook's exploration it remained unvisited until 1788, when, owing
mainly to Banks' influence, Botany Bay was pitched upon as a convict
settlement, and a squadron, consisting of H.M.S. Sirius, the Supply brig,
3 storeships, and 6 transports, under the command of Captain Arthur
Phillip, R.N., which had sailed from England on May 13th, 1787, arrived
in that bay on January 18th, 1788, but immediately moved into Port
Jackson, where the settlement of Sydney was formed.

The early history of the Colony was one of struggle and starvation, and
it was many years before any prosperity was attained. In 1839 the
deportation of convicts ceased, but it was not until 1851, when gold was
found, that free settlers in any large number came to the Colony.

Queensland, formerly the northern part of New South Wales, was formed a
separate Colony in 1859.

A white population of about 1,500,000 now inhabits the eastern part of
Australia, first explored by Cook, and their numbers are rapidly
increasing.

Although the products of the Colonies are mainly agricultural and
mineral, a very large proportion of this population are in the large
towns.

Sydney contains 230,000, Newcastle 20,000, Brisbane 55,000, Rockhampton
13,000.

Wool, one of the staple products, is obtained from some 80,000,000 sheep,
which, as Cook foresaw, have thriven well; and with 8,000,000 head of
cattle supply another export in the shape of frozen meat. Coal and other
minerals employ a large number of people, and the total value of exports
amounts to about 24,000,000 pounds.

The uninhabited shores and untracked seas of Cook's time, only 120 years
ago, are thus now teeming with life and trade; and it is no wonder that
the name of the great explorer is more venerated, and the memory of his
deeds is more fresh, in the Colonies than in the Mother country that sent
him forth to find new fields for British enterprise.


CHAPTER 9. FROM TORRES STRAIT TO BATAVIA.

[August 1770.]

FRIDAY, 24th. In the P.M. had light Airs from the South-South-West, with
which, after leaving Booby Island, as before mentioned, we steer'd
West-North-West until 5 o'clock, when it fell Calm, and the Tide of Ebb
which sets to the North-East soon after making, we Anchor'd in 8 fathoms
soft sandy bottom, Booby Island bearing South 50 degrees East, distant 5
miles; Prince of Wales Isles extending from North-East by North to South
55 degrees East. There appear'd to be an open clear passage between these
Islands extending from North 64 degrees East to East by North. At 1/2
past 5 in the morning in purchasing* (* Weighing the anchor.) the Anchor,
the Cable parted about 8 or 10 fathoms from the Anchor; I immediately
order'd another Anchor to be let go, which brought the ship up before she
had drove a cable's length from the Buoy; after this we carried out a
Kedge, and warped the ship nearer to it, and then endeavour'd to sweep
the Anchor with a Hawser, but miss'd it, and broke away the Buoy rope.*
(* The kedge is a small anchor. Sweeping is dragging the middle of a
rope, or hawser, held at the two ends from two boats some distance apart,
along the bottom, with the object of catching the fluke of the anchor as
it lies on the bottom, and so recovering it. It is a long and wearisome
operation if the bottom is uneven. Cook, however, having already lost one
of his large anchors, could not afford to leave this without an effort.)
We made several Attempts afterwards, but did not succeed. While the Boats
were thus employed we hove up the Kedge Anchor, it being of no more use.
At Noon Latitude observed 10 degrees 30 minutes South. Winds at
North-East, a fresh breeze; the Flood Tide here comes from the same
Quarter.

Saturday, 25th. Winds at North-East and East-North-East, a gentle breeze.
Being resolv'd not to leave the Anchor behind while there remain'd the
least probability of getting of it, after dinner I sent the Boats again
to sweep for it first with a small line, which succeeded, and now we
know'd where it lay we found it no very hard matter to sweep it with a
Hawser. This done, we hove the Ship up to it by the same Hawser, but just
as it was almost up and down the Hawser slip'd, and left us all to do
over again. By this time it was dark, and obliged us to leave off until
daylight in the morning, when we sweep'd it again, and hove it up to the
bows, and by 8 o'Clock weigh'd the other anchor, got under sail, and
stood away North-West, having a fresh breeze at East-North-East. At Noon
we were by observation in the Latitude of 10 degrees 18 minutes South,
Longitude 219 degrees 39 minutes West, having no land in sight, but about
2 miles to the Southward of us lay a Shoal,* (* Cook Reef.) on which the
Sea broke, and I believe a part of it dry. At low Water it extended
North-West and South-East, and might be about 4 or 5 Leagues in Circuit;
depth of Water at this time and since we weigh'd 9 fathoms.

Sunday, 26th. Fresh breezes at East in standing to the North-West. We
began to Shoalden our water from 9 to 7 fathoms, and at 1/2 past one,
having run 11 Miles since Noon, the boat which was a head made the signal
for Shoal Water, immediately upon which we let go an Anchor, and brought
the Ship up with the sails standing as the boats was but a little way
ahead, having but just relieved the Crew, and at same time we saw from
the Ship Shoal Water* (* Cook Shoal.) in a manner all round us, and both
wind and Tide setting upon it. We lay in 6 fathoms with the Ship, but
upon sounding about her found hardly 2 fathoms, a very rocky bottom, not
much above 1/2 a cable's length from us from the east round by the North
and West as far as South-West, so that there was no way to get clear but
the way we came. This was one of the many Fortunate Escapes we have had
from Shipwreck, for it was near high water, and there run a short
cockling sea that would soon have bulged the Ship had she struck. These
Shoals that lay a fathom or 2 under Water are the most dangerous of any,
for they do not shew themselves until you are close upon them, and then
the water upon them looks brown like the reflection of dark clouds.
Between 3 and 4 the Ebb began to make, when I sent the Master to sound to
the Southward and South Westward, and in the meantime, as the Ship
tended,* (* Swung to the tide.) hove up the Anchor, and with a little
Sail stood to the Southward and afterwards edged away to the Westward,
and got once more out of danger, where at sun set we Anchor'd in 10
fathoms Sandy bottom. Having a fresh of wind at East-South-East, at 6
o'clock in the morning we weighed and stood West, with a fresh of wind at
East, having first sent a boat ahead to sound. I did intend to have
steer'd North-West until we had made the Coast of New Guinea, designing
if Possible to touch upon that Coast, but the meeting with these Shoals
last night made me Alter the Course to West, in hopes of meeting with
fewer dangers and deeper Water; and this we found, for by Noon we had
deepned our water gradually to 17 fathoms, and this time we were by
observation in the Latitude of 10 degrees 10 minutes South, Longitude 220
degrees 12 minutes West. Course and distance sail'd since yesterday at
noon North 76 degrees West, 11 Leagues, no land in sight.

[Off South Coast of New Guinea.]

Monday, 27th. Fresh breezes between the East by North and
East-South-East, with which we steer'd West until sun set; depth of Water
from 27 to 23 fathoms. We now Reef'd the Topsails, shortened Sail, and
hoisted in the pinnace and Long boat up alongside, and afterwards kept
upon a Wind all night under our Topsails, 4 hours on one Tack and four
hours on the other; depth of Water 25 fathoms, very even soundings. At
daylight made all the Sail we could, and steer'd West-North-West until 8
o'clock, then North-West; at Noon we were by Observation in the Latitude
of 9 degrees 56 minutes South, Longitude 221 degrees 00 minutes West;
Variation 2 degrees 30 minutes East. Course and distance sail'd since
yesterday at Noon North 73 degrees 33 minutes West, 49 miles.

Tuesday, 28th. Fresh breezes at East and East by South and fair weather.
Continued a North-West Course until sun set, at which time we shortned
sail, and haul'd close upon a Wind to the Northward; depth of Water 21
fathoms. At 8 Tack'd and stood to the Southward until 12, then stood to
the Northward under little Sail until daylight, sounding from 25 to 17
fathoms; Shoalding as we stood to the Northward. At this time we made
sail and steer'd North in order to make the land of New Guinea; from the
time of our making sail until noon the depth of Water gradually decreased
from 17 to 12 fathoms, a stony and shelly bottom. We were now by
Observation in the Latitude of 8 degrees 52 minutes South, which is in
the same Parrallel as the Southern parts of New Guinea as it is laid down
in the Charts; but there are only 2 points so far to the South, and I
reckon we are a degree to the Westward of both, and for that reason do
not see the Land which trends more to the Northward. Our Course and
distance sail'd since Yesterday is North-North-West, 69 Miles; Longitude
in 221 degrees 27 minutes West. The Sea in many places is here cover'd
with a kind of a brown scum, such as Sailors generally call spawn; upon
our first seeing it it alarm'd us, thinking we were among Shoals, but we
found the same depth of Water were it was as in other places; neither Mr.
Banks nor Dr. Solander could tell what it was, altho' they had of it to
Examine.

Wednesday, 29th. Continued standing to the Northward, with a fresh gale
at East by South and South-East until 6 o'clock, having very irregular
and uncertain soundings from 24 to 7 fathoms. At 4 we made the Land from
the Mast head, bearing North-West by North, and which appear'd to be very
low. At 6 it extended from West-North-West to North-North-East, distant 4
or 5 Leagues. At this time hauld close upon a wind to the Eastward until
7 o'clock, then Tack'd and stood to the Southward until 12, at which time
we wore and stood to the Northward until 4, then lay her Head off until
daylight, when we again saw the Land, and stood North-North-West directly
for it, having a fresh gale at East by South. Our Soundings in the night
were from 17 to 5 fathoms, very irregular, without any sort of Rule with
respect to our distance from the Land. At 1/2 past 6 a small low island,
laying about a League from the Main, bore North by West, distant 5 miles;
this island lays in the Latitude of 8 degrees 13 minutes South, Longitude
221 degrees 25 minutes West. I find it laid down in the Charts by the
Name of St. Bartholomew or Whermoysen. We now steer'd North-West by West,
West-North-West, West by North, West by South, and South-West by West, as
we found the land to lay, having a Boat ahead of the Ship sounding; depth
of water from 5 to 9 fathoms. When in 7, 8 or 9 fathoms we could but just
see the Land from the Deck; but I did not think we were at above 4
Leagues off, because the land is exceeding low and level, and appeared to
be well cover'd with wood; one sort appeared to us to be Cocoa Nutt
Trees. By the Smookes we saw in different parts as we run along shore we
were assured that the Country is inhabited. At Noon we were about 3
Leagues from the land, the Westermost part of which that we could see
bore South 79 degrees West; our Latitude by Observation was 8 degrees 19
minutes South, Longitude 221 degrees 44 minutes West. The Island, St.
Bartholomew, bore North 74 degrees East, distant 20.* (* The ship was now
off the south coast of New Guinea, and near what is known as Princess
Marianne Strait, which separates Frederick Henry Island from the main
island. All this coast is very shallow, but very imperfectly charted to
the present day.)

Thursday, 30th. Fresh breezes at South-East, East-South-East, and East by
South. After steering South-West by West, 6 miles, we discover'd on our
Starboard bow and ahead a Strong appearance of Shoal Water, and by this
time we had Shoald our water from 10 to 5 fathoms; upon which I made the
Pinnace Signal to Edge down to it, but she not going far enough, we sent
the Yawl to sound in it, and at the same time hauld off close upon a
Wind, with the Ship until 4, at which time we had run 6 Miles, but did
not depen our water anything. We then Edged away South-West, 4 Miles
more, but finding still Shoal Water we brought too, and call'd the Boats
on board by Signal, hoisted them in, and then hauld off close upon a
wind, being at this time about 3 or 4 Miles from the Land. The Yawl found
only 3 fathoms water in the place where I sent her to sound, which place
I weather'd about 1/2 a mile. Between 1 and 2 we passed a Bay or Inlet,
before which lies a small Island that seems to Shelter it from the
Southerly winds; but I very much doubt their being Water behind it for
Shipping. I could not attempt it because the South-East Trade wind blows
right in, and we have not as yet had any land breezes. We stretched off
to Sea until 12 o'Clock, at which time we were 10 and 11 Leagues from the
Land, and had depen'd our Water to 29 fathoms; we now tack'd and stood in
until 4 o'Clock, when, being in 6 1/2 fathoms, we tack'd and lay her head
off until day light, at which time we saw the land bearing North-West by
West, distant about 4 Leagues. We now made sail and steer'd
West-South-West, and then West by South, but coming into 54 fathoms we
hauld off South-West until we depen'd our Water to 8 fathoms; we then
keept away West by South and West, having 9 fathoms and the Land just in
sight from the Deck, which we judged not above 3 or 4 Leagues off, as it
is everywhere exceeding low. At Noon we were by Observation in the
Latitude of 8 degrees 38 minutes South, Longitude 222 degrees 34 minutes
West. St. Bartholomew Isle bore North 69 degrees East, distant 74 Miles.

[Off Cape Walsche, New Guinea.]

Friday, 31st. Between 12 and 1 in the P.M. Steer'd North-North-West, in
which time we Shoalded our Water from 8 to 5 1/2, which I thought was
little enough, and therefore keept away again West, and soon depen'd it
to 7 fathoms, which depth we keept until 6, having the land just in sight
from the Deck. At this time the Western Extream bore North, distant about
4 Leagues, and Seem'd to end in a point and turn away to the Northward;
we took it to be Point St. Augustine or Walsche Caep, Latitude 8 degrees
24 minutes South, Longitude 222 degrees 55 minutes West.* (* This
position is correct. Mr. Green had been assiduously observing lunars, and
it appears strange that the error of the position of the north point of
Australia was not discovered; but doubtless the discrepancy was put down
to current.) We now shortned sail and hauld off South-South-West and
South by West, having the wind at South-East and South-East by East, a
Gentle breeze; we stood off 16 Miles, having from 7 to 27 fathoms,
deepning gradually as we run off. At midnight we Tacked and stood in
until daylight, at which time we could see no land, and yet we had only 5
1/2 fathoms. We now Steer'd North-West, having the same deepth of Water
until near 9 o'Clock, when we began to Depen our Water to 6 1/2 and 7
fathoms. By this I thought that we were far Enough to the Westward of the
Cape, and might haul to the Northward with Safety, which we now did,
having the Wind at North-East by East, a light breeze. By Noon we had
increased our Water to 9 fathoms, and were by Observation in the Latitude
of 8 degrees 10 minutes South, which was 10 Miles to the Northward of
that given by the Log; by which I conjectur'd that we had meet with a
strong Current setting round the Cape, not only to the Northward, but to
the Westward also, otherwise we ought to have seen the Land, which we did
not.

[September 1770.]

Saturday, 1st September. In the P.M. and most part of the night had a
fresh breeze from the South-East with which we keept standing in for the
land North-East and East-North-East, close upon a wind, until half past
6, when we Anchor'd in 4 1/2 fathoms, soft muddy bottom, as we have every
were found upon the Coast. About an hour before we Anchor'd we saw the
land from the Mast head extending from the East by North to
South-South-East, all very low; at the time we Anchor'd we found a small
drean* (* Drain.) of a Tide setting away to the North-West, which
continued until 2 in the morning, when the Water had fell 9 feet or
better. This Tide of Ebb was then succeeded by the Flood, which came from
the South-West; yet we did not find the Water to rise much upon a
perpendicular, or else the greatest fall of the Tide had not been well
attended to in the night, for at 6, when we got under sail, we had no
more than 3 fathoms under the ship, and yet we could not see the land
from the Deck. After getting under sail we stood to the Northward with a
light breeze at East, and deepned our Water by noon to 10 fathoms, having
the Land just in sight from the Mast head to the South-East. At this time
we were in the Latitude of 7 degrees 39 minutes South, Longitude 222
degrees 42 minutes West; Port St. Augustine bore South 10 degrees West,
distant 15 Leagues.

Sunday, 2nd. In the P.M. had Calm until 2, when a light breeze sprung up
at North by East, and we stood in for the Land East by North until 5, at
which time we got the wind from the South-West, a light breeze, with
which we steer'd North-East, edging in for the land, having it in sight
from the Deck, and which I judged to be about 3 or 4 Leagues off, being
very low land. Found the Variation to be 2 degrees 34 minutes East, and a
little before 8 o'Clock, having but little wind, we Anchor'd in 7
fathoms, soft Muddy bottom. In the Afternoon and evening we saw several
Sea Snakes, some of which the people in the Boat alongside took up by
hand. At daylight in the Morning we got under sail, and stood away to the
North-North-East, having a fresh gale at East, which by noon brought us
into the Latitude of 7 degrees 14 minutes South, Longitude 222 degrees 30
minutes West; Depth of Water 13 fathoms. Course and distance sail'd since
Yesterday Noon is North 24 degrees East, 27 Miles, having at this time no
land in sight, for the Land, according to the Charts, trends more
Easterly than the Wind would permit us to sail.

Monday, 3rd. Steer'd North by East, with a fresh breeze at East by North
until 7 in the Evening, when the wind came to South-East by South, with
which we keept standing to the Eastward close upon a wind all Night,
having from 17 to 10 fathoms pretty even Soundings. At daylight we saw
the land extending from North by East to South-East, distant about 4
Leagues. We still keept standing in for it, having the advantage of a
fresh gale at East-South-East and East by South, until near 9, when,
being about 3 or 4 Miles off, and in 3 fathoms, we brought too and I went
ashore in the pinnace, accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, having
a mind to land once in this Country before we quit it Altogether, which I
now am determin'd to do without delay; for I found that it is only
spending time to little purpose, and carrying us far out of our way,
staying upon this Coast, which is so shallow that we can hardly keep
within sight of land.

[Land in New Guinea.]

At the time we put off from the Ship we saw not the least sign of
inhabitants; but we had no sooner landed than we saw the print of Men's
feet fresh upon the sand, and a little way farther we found a small Shed
or Hutt, about which lay green shells of Cocoa Nutts. By this we were
well assured that the inhabitants were not far off; nay, we thought we
heard their Voices in the woods, which were so close and thick that we
did not think it safe to venture in, for fear of an Ambuscade, as we had
only a Boat's crew with us, a part of which were left to look after the
boat, which lay about a 1/4 of a Mile from the Shore. We therefore took a
walk upon the Sea beach, but had not gone above 200 Yards before we were
attack'd by 3 or 4 Men, who came out of the woods a little before us, but
upon our firing upon them they retir'd. Finding that we could not search
the Country with any degree of Safety, we return'd to the boat, and was
followed by 60, or, as some thought, about 100, of the Natives, who had
advanced in small parties out of the woods; but they suffer'd us to go to
our boats without giving us any trouble. We had now time to view them
attentively; we thought them to be about the size and Colour of the New
Hollanders, with short, Cropt Hair, and quite naked like them. I thought
these of a lighter Colour; but that may be owing to a whitish Pigment
with which we thought their bodies were painted, because some appeared
darker than others.

Their Arms were ordinary darts of about 4 feet long, made of a kind of
reed, and pointed at one end with hard wood; but what appear'd more
extraordinary to us was something they had which caused a flash of fire
or Smoak, very much like the going off of a pistol or small Gun, but
without any report. The deception was so great that the people in the
Ship actually thought that they had fire Arms; indeed, they seem'd to use
these things in imitation of such, for the moment the first man we saw
made his appearance he fir'd off one of these things, and while we lay
looking at them in the boat 4 or 5 would let them off all at once, which
had all the appearance in the world of Volleys of Small Arms; but I am
confident that nothing came from them but smook, but by what means this
was done, or what purpose it answer'd, we were not able to Guess. I
thought the Combustable matter was contain'd in a reed or piece of small
Bamboo, which they gave a Swing round in the hand and caused it to go
off.* (* The natives carry hollow canes with burning tinder for making
fires.)

This place lies in the Latitude of 6 degrees 15 minutes South, about 65
Leagues to the North-East of Point St. Augustine, or Walsche Caep, and is
near to what is called in the Charts by the long name of Cape de la Colta
de St. Bonaventura.* (* Cook's landing place in New Guinea, on the
western side of this great island, was on a part of the coast scarcely
known to this day. It is in the part of the island claimed by the Dutch.
Cook's insatiable desire to explore is well shown in this digression from
his course to Batavia.) The land is very low, like every other part of
the Coast we have seen here; it is thick and Luxuriously cloathed with
woods and Verdure, all of which appear Green and flourishing. Here were
Cocoa nutt Trees, Bread Fruit Trees, and Plantain Trees, but we saw no
fruit but on the former, and these were small and Green; the other Trees,
Shrubs, Plants, etc., were likewise such as is common in the South Sea
Islands and in New Holland.

Upon my return to the Ship we hoisted in the boat and made sail to the
Westward, with a design to leave the Coast altogether. This, however, was
contrary to the inclination and opinion of some of the Officers, who
would have had me send a Party of Men ashore to cut down the Cocoa Nutt
Trees for the sake of the Nutts; a thing that I think no man living could
have justified, for as the Natives had attacked us for meer landing
without taking away one thing, certainly they would have made a Vigerous
effort to have defended their property; in which case many of them must
have been kill'd, and perhaps some of our own people too, and all this
for 2 or 300 Green Cocoa Nutts, which, when we had got them, would have
done us little service; besides nothing but the utmost necessity would
have obliged me to have taken this method to come at refreshments.

It's true I might have gone farther along the Coast to the Northward and
Westward until we had found a place where the Ship could lay so near the
Shore as to cover the people with her Guns when landed; but it is very
probable that before we had found such a place we should have been
carried so far to the West as to have been obliged to have gone to
Batavia by the way of the Moluccas, and on the North side of Java, where
we were all utter Strangers. This I did not think was so safe a Passage
as to go to the South of Java and thro' the Straits of Sunda, the way I
propose to myself to go. Besides, as the Ship is leakey, we are not yet
sure wether or no we shall not be obliged to heave her down at Batavia;
in this case it becomes the more necessary that we should make the best
of our way to that place, especially as no new discovery can be Expected
to be made in these Seas, which the Dutch have, I believe, long ago
narrowly examin'd, as appears from 3 Maps bound up with the French
History of Voyages to the Terra Australis, published in 1756,* (* De
Brye's Voyages.) which Maps, I do suppose, by some means have been got
from the Dutch, as we found the Names of many of the places are in that
Language.

It should likewise seem from the same Maps that the Spaniards and Dutch
have at one time or another circumnavigated the whole of the Island of
New Guinea, as the most of the Names are in these 2 Languages; and such
part of the Coast as we were upon I found the Chart tolerable good, which
obliges me to give some Credit to all the rest, notwithstanding we
neither know by whom or when they were taken, and I always understood,
before I had a sight of these Maps, that it was unknown whether or no New
Holland and New Guinea was not one continued land, and so it is said in
the very History of Voyages these Maps are bound up in. However, we have
now put this wholy out of dispute; but, as I believe, it was known
before, tho' not publicly, I claim no other Merit than the Clearing up of
a doubtful point. Another doubtfull point I should have liked to have
clear'd up, altho' it is of very little, if of any Consequence, which is,
whether the Natives of New Holland and those of New Guinea are, or were,
Original, one People, which one might well suppose, as these 2 Countrys
lay so near to each other, and the intermediate space fill'd up with
Islands. On the other hand, if these 2 people have or ever had any
friendly communication with Each other it seems strange, as I have before
observed, that they should not have transplanted from New Guinea over to
New Holland Cocoa Nutts, Bread fruit, Plantains, etc., etc., all very
useful Articles for the support of Man, that We never saw grow in the
latter, and which we have now seen in the former. La Maire hath given us
a Vocabulary of Words spoken by the People of New Britain (which before
Dampier's time was taken to be a part of New Guinea), by which it appears
that the people of New Britain speak a very different Language from those
of New Holland. Now should it be found that the Natives of New Britain
and those of New Guinea have had One Origin, and speak the same Language,
it will follow, of Course, that the New Hollanders are a different People
from both.* (* In the north of Australia the natives are distinctly
allied to the Papuans, but on the east of the continent they are of a
type of their own, and speak many different languages.)

[Off South-west Coast of New Guinea.]

Tuesday, 4th. Stood to the Westward all this day, having at first a
moderate breeze Southerly, which afterwards freshned and Veered to
South-East and East-South-East. We keept on sounding all the time, having
from 14 to 30 fathoms not regular, but sometimes more and sometimes less.
At noon we were in 14 fathoms; by observation in the Latitude of 6
degrees 44 minutes South, Longitude 223 degrees 51 minutes West. Course
and distance sail'd since Yesteday Noon South 76 minutes West, 120 Miles.

Wednesday, 5th. Winds at East by South and South-East by East, a fresh
gale and Clear weather, with which were run 118 Miles upon a South 69
degrees 15 minutes West Course, which at Noon brought us into the
Latitude of 7 degrees 25 minutes South, Longitude 225 degrees 41 minutes
West; depth of Water 28 fathoms, having been in soundings the whole of
this day's run, generally between 10 and 20 fathoms. At half an hour past
one in the Morning we past by a small low Island, which bore from us at
that time North-North-West, distant 3 or 4 Miles; depth of Water 14
fathoms, and at daylight we discover'd another low Island extending from
North-North-West and North-North-East, distant 2 or 3 Leagues. I believe
I should have landed upon this Island to have known its produce, as it
did not appear to be very small, had not the wind blown too fresh for
such an undertaking, and at the time we passed the Island we had only 10
fathoms Water, a rocky bottom; I was therefore afraid of running down to
leeward for fear of meeting with Shoal Water and foul ground. These
Islands have no place on the Charts, unless they are the Arrow Isles,
which, if they are, they are laid down much too far from New Guinea. I
found the South part of these to lay in the Latitude 7 degrees 6 minutes
South, Longitude 225 degrees 0 minutes West.* (* These were probably
Karang and Ennu Islands, two outliers of the Arru Islands.)

Thursday, 6th. A steady fresh gale at East by South and clear weather,
with which we steer'd West-South-West. At 7 in the Evening we took in the
small Sails, reefd the Topsails, and sounded, having 50 fathoms; we still
keept West-South-West all night, going at the rate of 4 1/2 Miles an
hour. At 10 had 42 fathoms; at 11, 37; and at 12 o'Clock 45; 1 o'Clock
49; and at 3, 120; after which we could get no ground. In the evening we
caught 2 Boobies, which settled upon the rigging, and these were the
first of the kind we have caught in this manner the voyage, altho' I have
heard of them being caught this way in great numbers. At daylight, in the
Morning, we made all the sail we could, and at 10 o'Clock saw land
extending from North-North-West to West by North, distant 5 or 6 League.
At Noon it bore from North to West about the same distance; our Latitude
by observation was 8 degrees 15 minutes South, Longitude 227 degrees 47
minutes West. This land is of an even and moderate height, and by our run
from New Guinea ought to be a part of the Arrow Isles;* (* This was the
southern part of the Tenimber Islands.) but it lays a degree farther to
the South than any of these Islands are laid down in the Charts. We
sounded, but had no ground, with 50 fathoms of Line.

[Remarks on Charts.]

Friday, 7th. As I was not able to satisfy myself from any Chart what land
it was we saw to Leeward of us, and fearing it might trend away more
Southerly, and the weather being hazey so that we could not see far, we
steer'd South-West, which Course by 4 o'Clock run us out of sight of the
land; by this I was assured that no part of it lay to the Southward of 8
degrees 15 minutes South. We continued standing to the South-West all
night under an Easey sail, having the advantage of a fresh gale at
South-East by East and East-South-East, and clear moon light; we sounded
every hour, but had no bottom with 100 and 120 fathoms of line. At
daylight in the Morning we steer'd West-South-West, and afterwards West
by South, which by Noon brought us into the Latitude of 9 degrees 30
minutes South, and Longitude 229 degrees 34 minutes West, and by our run
from New Guinea ought to be in sight of Wessels Isle, which, according to
the Chart is laid down about 20 or 25 Leagues from the coast of New
Holland; but we saw nothing, by which I conclude that it is wrong laid
down; and this is not to be wonder'd at when we consider that not only
these Islands, but the lands which bound this Sea have been discover'd
and explored by different people and at different times, and compiled and
put together by others, perhaps some Ages after the first discoveries
were made. Navigation formerly wanted many of these helps towards keeping
an Accurate Journal which the present Age is possessed of; it is not they
that are wholy to blame for the faultiness of the Charts, but the
Compilers and Publishers, who publish to the world the rude Sketches of
the Navigator as Accurate surveys, without telling what authority they
have for so doing; for were they to do this we should then be as good or
better judge than they, and know where to depend upon the Charts, and
where not. Neither can I clear Seamen of this fault; among the few I have
known who are Capable of drawing a Chart or Sketch of a Sea Coast I have
generally, nay, almost always, observed them run into this error. I have
known them lay down the line of a Coast they have never seen, and put
down Soundings where they never have sounded; and, after all, are so fond
of their performances as to pass the whole off as Sterling under the
Title of a Survey Plan, etc. These things must in time be attended with
bad Consequences, and cannot fail of bringing the whole of their works in
disrepute.* (* Cook had good reason for writing thus, and being himself
scrupulously honest and careful, he felt this scamped work to be a
disgrace to seamen.) If he is so modest as to say, Such and such parts,
or the whole of his plan is defective, the Publishers or Vendures will
have it left out, because they say it hurts the sale of the work; so that
between the one and the other we can hardly tell when we are possessed of
a good Sea Chart until we ourselves have proved it.

Saturday, 8th. Winds Easterly, with a high Sea from the same Quarter. Our
Course and distance sail'd this 24 Hours is South 86 degrees 30 minutes
West, 102 Miles; Latitude in 9 degrees 36 minutes South, Longitude 231
degrees 17 minutes West.

Sunday, 9th. Light Airs and Clear weather the most part of this 24 Hours.
In the evening found the Variation by several Azimuths to be 0 degrees 12
minutes West, and by the Amplitude 0 degrees 5 minutes West. At Noon we
were by observation in the Latitude of 9 degrees 46 minutes South,
Longitude 232 degrees 7 minutes West. Course and distance sail'd since
yesterday at Noon South 78 degrees 45 minutes West, 52 Miles. For these 2
days past we have steer'd due West, and yet we have by observation made
16 Miles Southing--6 Miles Yesterday and 10 to-day; from which it should
seem that there is a Current setting to the Southward and Westward
withall, as I should suppose.

Monday, 10th. Light Airs Easterly, except in the morning, when we had it
at North; at sunset found the Variation to be 0 degrees 2 minutes West,
at the same time saw, or thought we saw, very high land bearing
North-West, and in the Morning saw the same appearances of land in the
same Quarter, which left us no room to doubt but what it was land, and
must be either the Island of Timor land or Timor, but which of the 2 I
cannot as yet determine.* (* This was Timor. What Cook calls Timor land
is probably Timor Laut, another name for the principal island of the
Tenimber Group.) At Noon we were by Observation in the Latitude of 10
degrees 1 minute South, which was 15 Miles to the Southward of that given
by the Log. Longitude in per Observation 233 degrees 27 minutes West.

Tuesday, 11th. Variable light Airs and Clear weather. Steer'd North-West,
in order to discover the Land plainer until 4 in the morning, at which
time the wind came to North-West and West, with which we stood to the
Southward until 9 o'Clock, when we Tack'd and stood North-West, having
the wind at West-South-West. At sun rise in the morning we could see the
land extend from West-North-West to North-East; at noon we could see it
extend to the Westward as far as West by South 1/2 South, but no farther
to the Eastward than North by East. We were now well assured that this
was part of the Island of Timor, in consequence of which the last Island
we saw must have been Timor land, the South part of which lies in the
Latitude of 8 degrees 15 minutes South, Longitude 228 degrees 10 minutes,
whereas in the Charts the South Point is laid down in Latitude 9 degrees
30 minutes. It is possible that the Land we saw might be some other
Island; but then I cannot see how we could have miss'd seeing Timor land,
soposing it to be right laid down in Latitude, as we were never to the
Southward of 9 degrees 30 minutes; for my design was to have made that
Island, and to have landed upon it to have seen what it produced, as it
is (according to the Charts) a large Island, and not settled by the Dutch
that I ever heard off. We were now in the Latitude of 9 degrees 37
minutes, Longitude 233 degrees 54 minutes West by observation of the Sun
and Moon, and Yesterday we were by Observation in 233 degrees 27 minutes
West. The difference is 27 minutes, which is exactly the same as what the
Log gave; this, however, is a degree of accuracy in observation that is
seldom to be expected.

[Off South Coast of Timor.]

Wednesday, 12th. Winds between the South and West, a light breeze and
Clear weather in the P.M.; stood in shore until 8 o'Clock, then Tack'd
and stood off, being about 6 Leagues from the Land, which at dark extend
from South-West 1/2 West to North-East; at this time we sounded and had
no ground with 140 fathoms of line, being not above 4 Leagues from the
Land. At 12 o'Clock we Tack'd and stood in, having but little wind, and
continued so until noon, at which time we were by Observation in Latitude
9 degrees 36 minutes South; the Log this 24 Hours gave 18 Miles Westing,
but it did not appear by the land that we had made so much. We saw
several Smoaks upon the Land by day, and fires in the Night.

Thursday, 13th. Stood in shore, with a light breeze at South by West
until 1/2 past 5 o'Clock in the P.M., when, being a Mile and a 1/2 from
the Shore, and in 16 fathoms, we tack'd and stood off. At this time the
Extreams of the Land extended from North-East by East to West by South
1/2 South; this last was a low point, distant from us about 3 Leagues. We
were right before a small Creek or Inlet into the low land, which lies in
the Latitude of 9 degrees 34 minutes South. Probably it might be the same
as Dampier went into in his Boat, for it did not seem to have depth of
Water sufficient for anything else. In standing in shore we sounded
several times, but found no soundings until we got within 2 1/2 Miles of
the Shore, where we had 25 fathoms, soft bottom. We stood off Shore until
12 o'Clock, with the wind at South, then Tack'd and stood to the Westward
2 Hours, when the wind veer'd to the South-West and West-South-West, and
then we stood to the Southward. In the Morning found the Variation to be
1 degree 10 minutes West by the Amplitude, and by the Azimuth 1 degree 27
minutes West; at Noon we were by Observation in the Latitude of 9 degrees
45 minutes South, Longitude 234 degrees 12 minutes West, and about 6 or 7
Leagues from the land, which extended from North 31 degrees East to
West-South-West 1/2 West. Winds at South-South-West, a Gentle breeze.

Friday, 14th. Light Land and Sea breezes; the former we had from West by
North, and only a few hours in the morning, the latter we had from the
South-South-West and South. With these winds we advanced but slowly to
the Westward. At Noon we were about 6 or 7 Leagues from the Land, which
extended from North by East to South 78 degrees West; our Latitude by
Observation was 9 degrees 54 minutes South. Course and Distance sail'd
since Yesterday noon South 68 degrees West, 24 Miles. We saw several
Smoakes ashore in the P.M., and fires in the night, both upon the Low
land and up in the Mountains.

Saturday, 15th. In the P.M. had the Sea breezes at South-South-West and
South, with which we stood to the Westward until 8 o'Clock, when being
about 3 Leagues from the Land, and having very little wind, we tack'd and
lay her Head off Shore. At 11 o'Clock we got the Land wind at North by
West, with which we steer'd South-West by West along shore, keeping about
4 or 5 Miles from the Land on which in the morning we saw several Houses,
Plantations, etc. At 9 o'Clock we got the wind at North-East by East, a
light breeze; at Noon we were about 2 Leagues from the Land, which
extended as far to the Southward as South-West by West; our Latitude by
observation was 10 degrees 1 minute South. Course and Distance sail'd
since Yesterday at Noon South 78 degrees 45 minutes West, 36 Miles.

Sunday, 16th. Light breezes from the North-East by East, with clear
weather, except in the morning, when we had it cloudy, with a few small
Showers of Rain. Steer'd along shore South-West and South-West by West
until 6 o'Clock in the morning, when we steer'd West-South-West, and at
9, West, at which time we saw the Island Rotte right ahead. At Noon we
were in the Latitude of 10 degrees 39 minutes, Longitude 235 degrees 57
minutes; the South end of Timor bore North-North-West, distant 5 or 6
Leagues; the Island of Rotte extending from South 75 degrees West to
North 67 degrees West, and the Island of Anaboa as Dampier calls it, or
Seman* (* Semao. This island lies off the Dutch settlement of Koepang or
Concordia in Timor; but Cook was right in supposing he would have
received but a cold reception there. The Dutch discouraged any visits at
their outlying settlements. Rotte is a large island lying off the
south-west end of Timor.) as it is called in the Charts, which lies of
the South end of Timor, bore North-West. Course and distance sail'd since
Yesterday noon South 55 degrees 15 minutes West, 67 Miles. Dampier, who
has given us a large and, so far as I know, an Accurate discription of
the Island of Timor, says that it is 70 Leagues long and 16 Broad, and
that it lies North-East and South-West. I found the East side to lie
nearest North-East by East and South-West by West, and the South end to
lie in the Latitude 10 degrees 23 minutes South, Longitude 236 degrees 5
minutes West from Greenwich. We run about 45 Leagues along the East side,
which I observed to be free from Danger, and, excepting near the South
end, the Land which bounds the Sea is low for 2, 3, or 4 Miles inland,
and seem'd in many places to be intersected with Salt Creeks. Behind the
low land are Mountains, which rise one above another to a considerable
height. We continually saw upon it smoakes by day and fires by night, and
in many places houses and plantations. I was strongly importuned by some
of my Officers to go to the Dutch settlement at Concordia, on this
Island, for refreshments; but this I refused to comply with, knowing that
the Dutch look upon all Europeans with a Jealous Eye that come among
these Islands, and our necessities were not so great as to oblige me to
put into a place where I might expect to be but indifferently treated.

[Anchor at Savu.]

Monday, 17th. Winds Easterly, with which we steer'd West-North-West until
2 o'Clock, when being pretty near the North end of Rotte, we hauled up
North-North-West, in order to go between it and Anaboa. After steering 3
Leagues upon this Course we edged away North-West by West, and by 6 we
were clear of all the Islands; at this time the South part of Anaboa,
which lies in the Latitude of 10 degrees 15 minutes South, bore
North-East, distant 4 Leagues, and the Island of Rotte extending as far
to the Southward as South 36 degrees West. The North End of this Island
and the South end of Timor lies North 1/2 East and 1/2 West, distant
about 3 or 4 Leagues from each other. At the West end of the Passage
between Rotte and Anaboa are two Small Islands; the one lays near the
Rotte shore and the other off the South-West point of Anaboa; there is a
good Channel between the 2 of 5 or 6 Miles broad, which we came thro'.
Being now clear of the Islands we steer'd a West course all night until 6
a.m., when we unexpectedly saw an Island* (* Savu. An island about twenty
miles in length. It is but little visited or known by others than the
Dutch to this day.) bearing West-South-West, for by most of the Maps we
had on board we were to the Southward of all the Islands that lay between
Timor and Java; at least there were none laid down so near Timor in this
Latitude by almost one half, which made me at first think it a new
discovery; but in this I was mistaken. We now steer'd directly for it,
and by 10 o'Clock were close in with the North side, where we saw Houses,
Cocoa Nutt Trees, and a Flock of Cattle grazing; these were Temptations
hardly to be withstood by people in our situation, especially such as
were but in a very indifferent State of Health, and I may say mind too,
for in some this last was worse than the other, since I refused to touch
at the Island of Timor, whereupon I thought I could not do less than to
try to procure some refreshments here, as there appeared to be plenty.*
(* Cook's utter indifference as to what he eat or drank made him regard
privations in the matter of food with an equanimity which was not shared
by the rest of his companions.) With this View we hoisted out the
Pinnace, in which I sent Lieutenant Gore in shore to see if there were
any Convenient place to land, sending some trifles along with him to give
to the Natives in case he saw any. Mr. Gore landed in a small sandy cove
near to some Houses, and was met on the beach by 8 or 10 of the people,
who from both their behaviour and what they had about them shew'd that
they had Commerce with Europeans; upon Mr. Gore's returning with this
report, and likewise that there was No Anchorage for the Ship, I sent him
away with both money and goods to try to purchase some refreshments,
while we keept standing on and off with the Ship. At Noon we were about a
Mile from the Shore of the Island, which extends from South-East to
West-North-West, Latitude 10 degrees 27 minutes, Longitude 237 degrees 31
minutes West.

Tuesday, 18th. As soon as Mr. Gore landed he was meet on the beach by
several people, both Horse and Foot, who gave him to understand that
there was a Bay to Leeward where we could Anchor, and likewise get
refreshments. Upon Mr. Gore's return with this intelligence we bore away
for the Bay, in which we Anchor'd at 7 o'Clock in 38 fathoms Water, Clean
sandy bottom. About a Mile from Shore the North point of the Bay bore
North 30 degrees East, 2 1/2 Miles, and the South point or West end of
the Island bore South 63 degrees West. Two hours before we Anchor'd we
saw Dutch Colours hoisted in a Village which stands about a Mile inland,
and at day light in the Morning the same Colours were hoisted on the
beach abreast of the Ship. By this I was no longer in doubt but what here
was a Dutch settlement, and accordingly sent Lieutenant Gore on shore to
wait upon the Governor, or chief person residing here, to acquaint him
with the reasons that induced us to touch at this Island. Upon Mr. Gore's
landing we could perceive that he was received by a Guard of the Natives,
and not Dutch Troops, and Conducted up to the Village where the Colours
were hoisted last night. Some time after this I received a message from
him, acquainting me that he was there with the king of the Island, who
had told him that he could not supply him with anything without leave
from the Dutch Governor, who resided at another part of the Island, but
that he had sent to acquaint him of our Arrival and request.

[At Anchor. Savu.]

Wednesday, 19th. At 2 P.M. the Dutch Governor, and king of this part of
the Island, with his attendance, came on board with Mr. Gore (he having
left 2 Gentlemen ashore as Hostages). We entertained them at Dinner in
the best Manner we could, gave them plenty of good Liquor, made them some
considerable presents, and at their going away Saluted them with 9 Guns.
In return for these favours they made many fair Promises that we should
be immediately supplied with everything we wanted at the same price the
Dutch East India Company had it; and that in the morning Buffaloes, Hogs,
Sheep, etc., should be down on the beach for us to look at, and agree
upon a price. I was not at all at a loss for Interpreters, for both Dr.
Solander and Mr. Sporing understood Dutch enough to keep up a
Conversation with the Dutchman, and several of the Natives could speak
Portuguese, which language 2 or 3 of my people understood. In the morning
I went on shore, accompanied by Mr. Banks and several of the Officers and
Gentlemen, to return the King's Visit; but my Chief Business was to see
how well they would perform their Promises in regard to the things I
wanted. We had not been long ashore before we found that they had
promised more than they ever intended to perform; for, instead of finding
Buffaloes upon the beach, we did not so much as see one, or the least
preparations making for bringing any down, either by the Dutch Factor or
the King. The former pretended he had been very ill all night, and told
us that he had had a letter from the Governor of Concordia in Timor,
acquainting him that a ship (meaning us) had lately passed that Island,
and that if she should touch at this, and be in want of anything, he was
to supply her; but he was not to suffer her to make any stay, nor to
distribute, or leave behind her to be distributed, any valuable presents
to the inferior Natives. This we looked upon to be Afection that hardly
answer'd any purpose, unless it was leting us see how the Dutch had
insinuated themselves into favour with these people, which never could be
his intention. However, both he and the King still promised we should
have what we wanted, but pretended the Buffaloes were far in the Country,
and could not be brought down before night. With these excuses we were
obliged to be satisfied. The King gave us a dinner of boil'd Pork and
Rice, served up in Baskets after their manner, and Palm wine to drink;
with this, and some of our own Liquor, we fair'd Tolerable well. After we
had dined our Servants were called in to pertake of what remain'd, which
was more than they could Eat.

Thursday, 20th. We stay'd at the King's Pallace all the Afternoon, and at
last were obliged to return on board without doing anything farther than
a promise of having some Buffaloes in the morning; which we had now no
great reason to rely on. In the morning I went on shore again, and was
showed one small Buffaloe, which they asked 5 Guineas for. I offer'd 3,
which the man told me he would gladly take, and sent a Message to the
king to let him know what I had offer'd. The Messenger soon return'd, and
let me know that I could not have it under 5 Guineas; and this I refused
to give, knowing it was not worth one fifth part of the money. But this,
my refusal, had like to have overset all we had before done, for soon
after about 100 Men, some Arm'd with Musquets, others with Lances, came
down to the Landing Place. Besides the officer that commanded this party,
there came along with them a Man who spoke Portuguese, and I believe was
born of Portuguese Parents. This man is here (as we afterwards
Understood) as an Assistant to the Dutch Factor. He deliver'd to me the
King's order, or rather those of the Dutch Factor, the purport of which
was that we were to stay no longer than this day, pretending that the
people would not trade with us because we wanted their provisions for
nothing, etc.; whereas the Natives shew'd the greatest inclination
imaginable to supply us with whatever they had, and were far more
desirous of goods than money, and were, before this man came, selling us
Fowls and Syrup as fast as they could bring these things down. From this
and other Circumstances we were well Assured that this was all the
Dutchman's doing, in order to extort from us a sum of Money to put into
his own pocket. There hapned to be an old Raja at this time upon the
beach, whose Interest I had secured in the Morning by presenting him with
a Spy-glass; this man I now took by the hand, and presented him with an
old broad sword. This effectually secured him in our Interest, for the
Moment he got it he began to flourish it over the old Portuguese, and
made him and the Officer commanded the party to sit down at his back
side. Immediately after this trade was restored again for Fowls, etc.,
with more Spirit than ever; but before I could begin a Trade for
Buffaloes, which was what we most wanted, I was obliged to give 10
Guineas for 2, one of which weigh'd only 160 pounds. After this I bought
7 more at a more reasonable price, one of which we lost after he was paid
for. I might now have purchased as many as I pleased, for they now drove
them down to the Water side by Herds; but having got as many as I well
know'd what to do with, and likewise a number of Fowls, and a large
quantity of Syrup, I resolved to make no longer stay.

Friday, 21st. We got under sail, and stood away to the Westward along the
North side of the Island, and another smaller Island, which lies farther
to the Westward, which last bore from us at Noon South-South-East,
distant 2 Leagues.

[Description of Savu.]

Before we proceed any further it will be proper in this place to say
something of the Island we have been last at, which is called by the
Natives Savu. The Middle of it lies in about the Latitude of 10 degrees
35 minutes South, Longitude 237 degrees 30 minutes West. It may be about
8 Leagues in length from East to West, but of what breadth I know not,
because I only saw the North side. There are, as I am told, 3 Bays where
Ships can Anchor; the best is on the South-West side of the South-East
point; the one we lay in, called Seba, lies on the North-West side of the
Island. This bay is very well sheltered from the South-East Trade wind,
but lays wholy open to the North-West. The Land of this Island which
bounds the Sea is, in general, low, but in the Middle of the Island are
Hills of a moderate height, and the whole is agreeably diversified with
woods and Lawns, which afford a most pleasing prospect from the Sea. We
were told that the Island is but indifferently water'd in the dry Season,
especially towards the latter end of it, at which time there is no
running Stream upon the whole Island, only small Springs, which are all
at a distance from the Sea side. The dry seasons commences in March or
April, and ends in November; the remaining 3 or 4 Months they have
Westerly winds with rain, and this the time their Crops of Rice,
Calivances, and Indian Corn are brought forth, which are Articles that
this Island produceth.

They also breed a great Number of Cattle, viz., Buffaloes, Horses, Hogs,
Sheep, and Goats. Many of the former are sent to Concordia, where they
are kill'd and salted, in order to be sent to the more Northern Islands,
which are under the Dominion of the Dutch. Sheep and Goats' flesh is
dried upon this Island, packed up in Bales, and sent to Concordia for the
same purpose. The Dutch resident, from whom we had this information, told
us that the Dutch at Concordia had lately behaved so ill to the Natives
of Timor that they were obliged to have recourse to this Island and
others Adjacent for provisions for their own subsistance, and likewise
Troops (Natives of this Island) to assist the Dutch against those of
Timor. Besides the above productions, here are an Emmence Number of Palm
Trees, from which is extracted the Palm Wine, as it is called, a very
sweet, agreeable, cooling Liquor. What they do not immediately use they
boil down and make Syrup or Sugar of, which they keep in Earthen Jarrs.
Here are likewise Cocoa Nutts, Tamerind Trees, Limes etc., but in no
great plenty; Indico, Cotton, and Cinnamon, sufficient to serve the
Natives; these last Articles, we were told, the Dutch discourage the
growth of.

The Island is divided into 5 Kingdoms, which have lived in Peace and
Amity with each other for these hundred Years. At present the whole
Island is partly under the direction of the Dutch East India Company, who
have a Resident or Factor who constantly lives here, without whose leave
the Natives are not to supply any other Nation with anything whatever;
but the whole produce of the Island, besides what serves themselves, is
in a manner the property of the Company. The Company by way of a Tribute
oblige them to raise and pay Annually a certain quantity of Rice, Indian
Corn, and Callivances, for which the Company makes Each of the Kings a
yearly present of a Cask of Arrack, and some other Trifles; the live
stock, Sheep and Goats' flesh, etc., they pay for in goods. The small
Islands which lie about a League to the Westward of this pays Annually a
Certain quantity of Arica Nutts, which is almost the only produce of that
Island.

The Island of Rotte is upon the same footing as this of Savu; both these
Islands, and the 3 Solors, belong to the Government of Concordia. From
what we could learn of the Island of Timor, it seems to be much upon the
same footing as it was in Dampier's time, which is that the Dutch possess
little more of that Island than what lies under the Command of the Fort
Concordia; the rest is in possession either of the Native Indians or the
Portuguese. We were likewise told that the Island of Ende belongs to the
Portuguese; that the principal settlement is at Larentucha, where there
is a Fort and a good Harbour. We were told that the Concordia, on the
Island Timor, is a free Port for Ships of any nation to touch at, where
they would not only be supplied with refreshments, but Naval Stores also.
Trading ships might probably meet with a good reception, but Kings'
ships, I am perswaided, would be looked upon as Spys. For my own part was
I only in want of refreshments, and obliged to touch at any of these
Islands, I should prefer going to a Portuguese settlement before any of
the Dutch, and when I was solicited by the Officers to call at Timor, I
proposed going to one of the Portuguese settlements; but this Mr. Hicks
made some Objections to, which was sufficient for me to lay it aside, as
I had not the least inclination to touch any where till we arriv'd at
Batavia, for my falling in with Savu was more chance and not design.

But to return to this Island, the Natives of which are of a Dark brown
Colour, with long lank Hair; their Cloathing is a peice of Calicoe or
other Cotton Cloath wrapped about their Middle; the better sort have
another peice, which they wear over their Shoulders, and the most of them
wear Turbands or Handkercheifs tyed round their Heads. They Eat of all
the Tame Animals they have got, viz., Hogs, Horses, Buffaloes, Cocks and
Hens, Dogs, Catts, Sheep and Goats, and are esteem'd much in the same
order, as I have mentioned; that is, their Hog flesh, which is certainly
as good as any in the world, they prefer before anything else; next to
Hogs, Horses, and so on. Fish is not esteem'd by them, and is only eat by
the common or poor people, who are allowed little else of meat kind.

They have a Custom among them, that whenever a king dies all the Cattle,
etc., that are upon his Estate are kill'd, with which the Successor makes
a feast, to which is invited all the principal people of the Island, who
stay until all is consumed; after this they every one, according to his
Abilities, make the young King a present, by which means he gets a fresh
stock, which he is obliged to Husband for some time. The other principal
men make also feasts, which are as extraordinary as these, for they
seldom end so long as the giver has got anything left alive upon his
Estate. They are said to be a people of good Morals, Virtuous and Chaste,
each man having only one wife, which he keeps for life; Fornication and
Adultry is hardly known among them. When a great Man marrys he makes
presents to all his Wife's relations of European and other Foreign
commodities to the value of 100 Rix Dollars. This Custom the Dutch East
India Company find it to their Interest to incourage. They speak a
Language peculiar to themselves, into which the Dutch have caus'd the new
Testament to be Translated, and have introduced it, with the use of
letters and writing, among them. By this means several hundred of them
have been converted to Christianity; the rest are some heathens, and
others of no religion at all, and yet they all stick up to the strict
rules of Morality. They all, both Men and Women, Young and Old, Chew of
the Beetle Leaf, Areca Nutts, and a sort of white lime, which I believe
is made from Coral stone; this has such an effect upon the Teeth that
very few, even of the Young people, have hardly any left in their Heads,
and those they have are as black as Ink. Their houses are built on posts
about 4 feet from the Ground; we asked the reason why they built them so,
and was told that it was only Custom; they are, however, certainly the
Cooler for it. They are thatched with Palm Leaves, and the Floors and
sides are boarded.

The man who resides upon this Island in behalf of the Dutch East India
Company is a German by birth. His name is Johan Christopher Lange. It is
hard to say upon what footing he is here. He is so far a Governor that
the Natives dare do nothing without his consent, and yet he can transact
no sort of business with Foreigners either in his own or that of the
Company's name; nor can it be a place of either Honour or Profit. He is
the only white man upon the Island, and has resided there ever since it
has been under the direction of the Dutch, which is about 10 Years. He is
allowed 50 Slaves (Natives of the Island) to attend upon him. These
belong to, and are Maintained by, the Company. He goes the Circuit of the
Island once in 2 Months; but on what account he did not tell us. When he
makes these rounds he carries with him a certain quantity of Spirit to
treat the great men with, which, he says, he is obliged to look well
after, otherwise they would steal it and get drunk; and yet, at another
time, he told us that he never knew a theft committed in the Island; but
some of the Natives themselves contradicted him in this by stealing from
us an Axe. However, from their behaviour to us in general I am of opinion
that they are but seldom guilty of these Crimes. This going round the
Island once in Two Months is most likely to see that the Natives make the
necessary preparations for fulfilling their engagements with the Dutch,
and to see that the Large Boats or small Vessels are taken proper care
of, which the Dutch keep in all the Bays of this Island in order to
collect and carry the grain, etc., to the Ship which comes Annually here.
They are likewise employed in carrying cattle, grain, etc., to Timor;
and, when not wanted, they are hauled aShore into Houses or Sheds built
on purpose. As I have mentioned Slaves, it is necessary to observe that
all the great men have Slaves which are the Natives of the Island. They
can dispose of them one to another, but cannot sell them to go out of the
Island. The price of a Slave is a good, large, fatt Hogg, Horse, etc. I
have before mentioned that many of the people can speak Portuguese, but
hardly any one Dutch. From this it is probable that this Island was
formerly under the Jurisdiction of the Portuguese, tho' the Dutch
Government never own'd as much, but said that the Dutch had Traded here
these hundred years past.* (* This account of the economy of Savu is a
good example of Cook's powers of observation. He was only four days at
the island, and yet gives us a good idea of the place and its
inhabitants.)

[Sail from Savu.]

Saturday, 22nd. Winds at South-South-East, South-East, and East; a gentle
breeze, which we steer'd West-South-West by Compass. At 4 o'Clock we
discover'd a small low Island* (* Dama Island.) bearing South-South-West,
distant 3 Leagues. The Island hath no place in any of our Charts:
Latitude 10 degrees 47 minutes South, Longitude 238 degrees 28 minutes
West. At Noon we were in the Latitude of 11 degrees 9 minutes South,
Longitude 239 degrees 26 minutes West. Course and distance sail'd since
yesterday noon, South 63 West, 67 miles.

Sunday, 23rd. Winds Easterly; a moderate breeze, which by noon brought us
into the Latitude of 11 degrees 10 minutes South, Longitude 240 degrees
48 minutes West. Course and distance saild since yesterday at noon is
West, 8 miles.

Monday, 24th. Winds at East and South-East; a moderate breeze, and fine,
pleasant weather. In the evening found the Variation to be 2 degrees 44
minutes West. At noon our Latitude was 11 degrees 8 minutes South,
Longitude 242 degrees 13 minutes West. Since we have been clear of the
Islands we have had constantly a swell from the Southward which I do not
suppose is owing to the winds blowing anywhere from thence, but to the
Sea, being so determined by the portion of the Coast of New Holland.

Tuesday, 25th. Moderate breezes at South-East, and clear, pleasant
weather. At Noon our Latitude was 11 degrees 13 minutes South, and
Longitude 244 degrees 41" West.

Wednesday, 26th. Winds and weather as yesterday. At Noon Latitude in 11
degrees 10 minutes, Longitude 245 degrees 41" West.

Thursday 27th. Winds at South-South-East; a fresh breeze. In the evening
found the variation to be 3 degrees 10 minutes West. At noon we were in
the Longitude of 247 degrees 42 minutes West, and Latitude 10 degrees 47
minutes, which is 25 Miles to the Northward of the Log, which I know not
how to account for.

Friday 28th. Winds at South-South-East and South-East; a fresh breeze and
Cloudy, with some Showers of rain. At Noon Latitude observed 10 degrees
51 minutes South, which is agreeable to the Logg, Longitude in 250
degrees 9 minutes, West.

Saturday, 29th. Moderate breeze at South-East and clear pleasant weather,
Steer'd North-West all this day, in order to make the land of Java. At
Noon we were by Observation in the Latitude of 9 degrees 31 minutes South
and Longitude 251 degrees 40 minutes West.

Sunday, 30th. Fresh gales and fair weather. In the A.M. I took into my
possession the Officers', Petty Officers' and Seamen's Log Books and
Journals, at least all that I could find, and enjoin'd every one not to
divulge where they had been.* (* These logs are now in the Public Record
Office. Mr. Green's log ends on the 2nd October. Not being an officer,
Cook doubtless overlooked it at first. This log should by rights have
been returned to Mr. Green, but as he died shortly after leaving Batavia,
it has found its way, with the others, to the Record Office.) At noon our
Course and distance sail'd since Yesterday at noon, is North 20 degrees
West, 126 Miles, which brought us into the Latitude of 7 degrees 34
minutes South and Longitude 252 degrees 23 minutes West.

[October 1770. Enter Sunda Strait. ]

Monday, 1st October. First and latter parts fresh breezes at South-East
and fair weather; the Middle squally with Lightning and rain. At 7 p.m.,
being then in the Latitude of Java head, and not seeing any land, assured
us that we had got too far to the Westward; upon which we hauld up
East-North-East, having before Steerd North by East. At 12 o'Clock saw
the Land bearing East, Tack'd, and stood to the South-West until 4, then
stood again to the Eastward, having very unsettled squally weather which
split the Main Topsail very much, and obliged us to bend the other; many
of our Sails are now so bad that they will hardly stand the least puff of
Wind. At 6 o'Clock Java head, on the West end of Java, bore South-East by
East, distant 5 Leagues; soon after this saw Princes Island, bearing East
1/2 South. At 10 o'Clock saw the Island of Cracatoa* (* The great
eruption, and consequent destruction of the larger part of this island in
1883, will be remembered. It lies in the centre of Sunda Strait.) bearing
North-East, distant 7 Leagues; Princes Island extending from South 53
degrees East to South by West, distant 3 Leagues. Course and distance
saild since Yesterday at Noon is North 24 degrees 30 minutes East, 70
Miles. Latitude in per Observation, 6 degrees 29 minutes South, Longitude
251 degrees 54 minutes; but either our Longitude must be erroneous or the
Straits of Sunda must be faltily laid down in all Books and Charts; but
this no doubt we shall have an opportunity to settle.* (* Cook's
longitude was in error nearly three degrees. No lunars had been taken
since they left Savu, and there is a current running westward. It is a
good example of the error of dead reckoning, even with the most careful
of navigators.)

Tuesday, 2nd. In the P.M., had the wind at South-South-East, South-East
by South and South-South-East, with which we stood to the Eastward close
upon a wind. At 6 o'Clock the Hill on Princes Island bore South-West by
South, and Cracatoa Island, North 10 Miles; in this situation had 58
fathoms, standing still to the Eastward. At 8 o'Clock had 52 fathoms,
muddy bottom, at 10 23 fathoms. By 4 in the morning we fetched close in
with the Java shore in 15 fathoms, then steer'd along shore. At 5 it fell
Calm, which continued with some Variable light Airs until noon, at which
time Anger Point bore North-East, distant 1 League, and Thwart-the-way
Island North. In the morning I sent a Boat ashore to try to get some
fruits for Tupia, who is very ill, and, likewise, to get some grass,
etc., for the Buffaloes we have still left. The Boats return'd with only
4 Cocoa Nutts, a small bunch of Plantains, which they purchased of the
Natives for a Shilling, and a few Shrubs for the Cattle.

Wednesday, 3rd. Soon after 12 o'Clock it fell quite Calm, which obliged
us to Anchor in 18 fathoms, Muddy bottom, about 2 Miles from shore, where
we found a strong Current setting to the South-West. Not long before we
Anchor'd we saw a Dutch Ship laying off Anger Point, on board which I
sent Mr. Hicks to enquire after News.* (* It will be recollected that the
Endeavour was now two years and two months from England, without the
slightest chance of any news from home. We can imagine the anxiety and
excitement on board on thus approaching civilisation, though they had no
prospect of personal letters. With the frequent communication of modern
times, we can scarcely realise such circumstances, and should certainly
consider them as an exceeding hardship.) Upon his return he inform'd me
that there were 2 Dutch Ships from Batavia, one bound for Ceylon, and the
other to the Coast of Mallabar, besides a small Fly-boat or Packet, which
is stationed here to carry all Packets, Letters, etc., from all Dutch
Ships to Batavia; but it seems more Probable that she is stationed here
to examine all Ships that pass and repass these Straits. We now first
heard the agreeable news of His Majesty's Sloop The Swallow being at
Batavia about 2 Years ago.* (* The Swallow, Captain Cartaret, had sailed
with the Dolphin in 1766, but separated from her on emerging from the
Strait of Magellan. The Dolphin had reached England some months before
Cook sailed, but nothing had been heard of the Swallow, and fears were
entertained of her loss.) At 7 o'Clock a breeze sprung up at
South-South-West, with which we weighed and stood to the North-East
between Thwart-the-way Island and the Cap:* (* Thwart-the-Way is an
island that lies right across the fairway of Sunda Strait. The Cap is
another smaller island that lies North-East of it.) soundings from 18 to
26 fathoms. We had but little Wind all night, and having a Strong Current
against us, we got no further by 8 o'Clock in the morning than under
Bantam Point. At this time the wind came to North-East, and obliged us to
Anchor in 22 fathoms about 2 Miles from the Shore. The above point bore
North-East by East, distant 1 League. Here we found a strong Current
setting to the North-West. In the morning we saw the Dutch packet
standing after us, but after the wind Shifted to the North-East she bore
away. One of the Dutch Captains told Mr. Hicks yesterday that the Current
sets constantly to the South-Westward, and that it would continue to set
so for a Month or Six Weeks longer.

[In Sunda Strait.]

Thursday, 4th. In the P.M. had the wind at North-East by North, which
obliged us to lay fast. About 6 o'Clock in the evening one of the Country
Boats came alongside in which was the Commander of the Packet before
mentioned; he seem'd to have 2 Motives for coming, one to take an account
of the Ship, and the other to sell us refreshments, for in the Boat were
Turtle, Fowls, Birds, etc., all of which they held at a pretty high
Price, and had brought to a bad market, as our Savu stock was not all
expended. I gave a Spanish Dollar for a small Turtle which weighed only
36 pounds. With respect to the Ship, he wanted to know her name, the
Captain's, the place we came last from and were bound, as I would not see
him myself. I order'd that no account should be given him from whence we
came; but Mr. Hicks, who wrote the Ship's name down in his book, put down
from Europe. Seeing this he expressed some surprise, and said that we
might write down what we pleased, for it was of no other use than for the
information of such of our Country men as might pass these Streights. At
7 o'Clock a light breeze sprung up at South-South-East, with which we got
under sail. At 1 A.M. Anchor'd again, having not wind to stem the Current
which we found to run 3 Knotts; at 2 o'Clock we weighed again, but,
finding that we lost ground, we were obliged to Anchor in 18 fathoms, the
Island Pulo Morack, which lies close under the Shore 3 Miles to the
Westward of Bantam Point: bore South-East by South, distance 1 1/2 miles.
Latitude observed, 5 degrees 55 minutes South.

Friday, 5th. At 5 in the P.M. we weighed with a light breeze at
South-West by South, which continued not long before it fell Calm, and
obliged us to Anchor again. At 1 o'Clock we weigh'd with the Land wind at
South-South-East, which died away in the Morning, and the Current running
strong against us we Anchor'd in 17 fathoms. A little before this, a Proe
came alongside, wherein was a Dutch Officer who came upon the same
business as the other. He sent me down a printed paper in English
containing 9 Articles or Questions, of which this is a Copy.

"The Commanders and Officers of the Ships where this Paper may be
presented, will be pleased to answer on the following Questions: viz.,
1. "To what Nation the Ship belongs, and its Name.
2. "If it comes from Europe or any other place.
3. "From what place it lastly departed from.
4. "Where unto design'd to go.
5. "What, and how many, ships of the Dutch Company by departure from the
last shore there lay'd, and their names.
6. "If one or more of these ships in Company with this is departed for
this or any other place.
7. "If during the Voyage any particularity is hapned or seen.
8. "If not any ships in Sea, or the Streights of Sunda have seen or
Hail'd in, and which.
9. "If any other News worth Attention at the place from whence the Ship
lastly departed or during the vogage is hapned.

"Batavia in the Castle,
the
By Order of the Governor
General and the Counselors of India.

"J. BRANDER BUNGL, Sect."

The first and fourth of these Questions I only answer'd, which when the
Officer saw, he made use of the very same words the other had done
before, viz.: that we might write what we pleased, for it was of no
consequence, etc., and yet he immediately said that he must send that
very paper away to Batavia by water, and that it would be there by
to-morrow noon, which shows that the Governor and Counselors of India
look upon such papers to be of some consequence. Be this as it may, my
reason for taking notice of it in this Journal, is because I am well
inform'd that it is but of very late years that the Dutch have taken upon
them to examine all Ships that pass these Streights. At 10 o'Clock we
weigh'd with a light breeze at South-West, but did little more than stem
the Current. At Noon, Bantam Point* (* Bantam Point, now called St.
Nicholas Point, is the north-west point of Java, and forms the
north-eastern extreme of Sunda Strait.) and Pula Baba, in one bearing
East by North, distant from the Point 1 1/2 Mile. Latitude observed, 5
degrees 53 minutes South.

Saturday, 6th. At 2 o'Clock P.M., finding we could not stem the Current,
we anchor'd, with the Kedge Anchor, under Bantam Point, where we lay
until 9, at which time Current made Slowly to the Eastward, and at the
same time a light breeze springing up, we weigh'd and stood to the East
until 10 o'Clock in the A.M., when the Current oblig'd us again to Anchor
in 22 fathoms, Pula Baba bearing East by South 1/2 South, distant 3 or 4
Miles. Our sounding from Bantam Point to this place was from 36 to 22
fathoms.

Sunday 7th. Light Air from the Southward with frequent Calms. At 6
o'Clock P.M., weighed with a light breeze at South-South-West, which was
not sufficient to stem the current, and was therefore obliged to come too
again, in 15 fathoms. At 10 o'Clock weighed again and stood to the
Eastward with the Wind at South-South-East. At 11 A.M., Anchor'd in 21
fathoms, the West end of Wapping Island bore South, distant 3 Miles, and
the Thousand Islands North by East 1/2 East, distant 3 or 4 Miles. Found
the Current still set to the Westward.

Monday, 8th. Had it Calm until 4 in the P.M., when we got the Sea breeze
at North-East very faint, with which we weighed and stood to the
Eastward, past Wapping Island, and the first Island to the Eastward of
it. Falling little wind we were carried by the Current between this last
Island and the 2nd Island, to the Eastward of Wapping Island, where we
were obliged to Anchor in 30 fathoms, being very near a ledge of Rocks
which spitted out from one of the Islands. At 1/2 past 2 o'Clock in the
A.M., weighed with the land wind at South and stood out clear of the
shoal, where we were again obliged to come to an Anchor, having Variable
light winds attended with Thunder and rain. At 5 o'Clock the weather
being fair, and a light breeze at South, we weighed, but making little or
no way against the Current, we soon came too again, in 28 fathoms, near a
small Island not laid down in the Charts; Pulo Pare* (* Wapping Island is
now known as Hoorn, and Pulo Pare as Agenietan Islands. They lie, among
many others, to the north-west of Batavia Roads.) bore East-North-East,
distant 6 or 7 Miles. While we lay here a Proe came alongside, where in
were 2 Malays, who sold us 3 Turtles, weighing 147 pounds, for a Spanish
Dollar. Some on board thought them dear, but I thought they were cheap,
founding my Judgment on the price the two Dutchmen that were on board
before set upon those they had, one of which we paid a Dollar for, that
weighed only 36 pounds.

Tuesday, 9th. A little past Noon weigh'd with a light breeze at
North-East, and stood to the Eastward until 5 o'Clock, when, not being
able to weather Pulo Pare, we Anchor'd in 30 fathoms, the said Island
extending from South-East to South-South-West, distant 1 Mile. At 10 got
the land wind at South, with which we weighed and stood to the
East-South-East all night; depth of water, from 30 to 22 fathoms, and
from 22 to 16 fathoms. When we Anchor'd at 10 o'Clock in the A.M. to wait
for the Sea breeze, the Island of Edam bore South-West by West, distant 6
or 7 Miles. At Noon we weighed and stood in for Batavia Road, having the
advantage of the Sea breeze at North-North-East.

[Arrival at Batavia.]

Wednesday, 10th, according to our reckoning, but by the people here
Thursday, 11th. At 4 o'Clock in the P.M. Anchor'd in Batavia road, where
we found the Harcourt Indiaman from England, 2 English Country Ships,* (*
A country ship is a vessel under the English flag, but belonging to a
port in English possessions abroad.) 13 Sail of large Dutch Ships, and a
number of small Vessels. As soon as we Anchor'd* (* The Endeavour took
nine days, and had to anchor fifteen times, in getting from Java Head, at
the entrance of Sunda Strait, to Batavia, a distance of 120 miles.) I
sent Lieutenant Hicks a shore to acquaint the Governor of our Arrival,
and to make an excuse for not Saluting; as we could only do it with 3
Guns I thought it was better let alone.

[At Batavia.]

The Carpenter now deliver'd me in the defects of the ship, of which the
following is a copy:--

"The Defects of His Majesty's Bark Endeavour, Lieutenant James Cook,
Commander.

"The Ship very leaky (as she makes from 12 to 6 Inches water per hour),
occasioned by her Main Kiel being wounded in many places and the Scarfe
of her Stem being very open. The false Kiel gone beyond the Midships
(from Forward and perhaps further), as I had no opportunity of seeing for
the water when hauld ashore for repair. Wounded on her Starboard side
under the Main Chains, where I immagine is the greatest leakes (but could
not come at it for the water). One pump on the Starboard side useless,
the others decayed within 1 1/2 Inch of the bore, otherwise Masts, Yards,
Boats, and Hull in pretty good condition.

"Dated in Batavia Road,

"this 10th of October, 1770.

"J. SATTERLY."

Previous to the above, I had consulted with the Carpenter and all the
other Officers concerning the Leake, and they were all unanimously of
Opinion that it was not safe to proceed to Europe without first seeing
her bottom; accordingly I resolved to apply for leave to heave her down
at this place, and, as I understood that this was to be done in writing,
I drew up the following request to be presented to the Governor, etc.,
etc.:--

"Lieutenant James Cook, commander of His Brittannick Majesty's Bark
Endeavour, Requests of the Right Hon'ble Petrus Albertus Van der Parra,
Governor-General, etc., etc., etc., the Indulgence of the following
Articles, viz.:

"Firstly, That he may be allow'd a proper and convenient place to heave
down and repair His Brittannick Majesty's Ship under his command.

"Secondly, That he may have leave to purchase such few Trifling Naval
stores as he may be in want of.

"Thirdly, That he may be permitted daily to purchase such provisions as
he may want; also such an Additional quantity as may enable him to
proceed on his passage home to England.

"Dated on board His Brittannick Majesty's
Bark Endeavour, in Batavia Road, the 11th
October, 1770.

"JAMES COOK."

In the morning I went on shore myself and had the foregoing request
Translated into Dutch by a Scotch Gentleman, a Merchant here.

Friday, 12th. At 5 o'clock P.M. I was introduced to the Governor-General,
who received me very politely and told me that I should have every thing
I wanted, and that in the Morning my request should be laid before the
Council where I was desir'd to attend.

About 9 o'clock in the Evening we had much rain, with some very heavy
Claps of Thunder, one of which carried away a Dutch Indiaman's Main Mast
by the Deck, and split it, the Maintopmast and Topgallantmast all to
shivers. She had had an Iron Spindle at the Maintopgallant Mast head
which had first attracted the Lightning. The ship lay about 2 Cable
lengths from us, and we were struck with the Thunder at the same time,
and in all probability we should have shared the same fate as the
Dutchman, had it not been for the Electrical Chain which we had but just
before got up; this carried the Lightning or Electrical matter over the
side clear of the Ship. The Shock was so great as to shake the whole ship
very sencibly. This instance alone is sufficient to recommend these
Chains to all Ships whatever, and that of the Dutchman ought to Caution
people from having Iron Spindles at their Mast heads.* (* No instance is
known of ships fitted with properly constructed lightning conductors
having received any damage.)

[At Batavia.]

In the morning I went on shore to the Council Chamber and laid my request
before the Governour and Council, who gave me for answer that I should
have every thing I wanted.

Saturday, 13th. Received on board a Cask of Arrack and some Greens for
the Ship's Company.

Sunday, 14th. Early this morning a ship sail'd from hence for Holland by
which I had just time to write 2 or 3 lines to Mr. Stephens, Secretary of
the Admiralty, to acquaint him of our Arrival, after which I went on
shore and waited upon the Shabander, who has the direction of the Town,
Port, etc., to get an order to the Superintendent at Onrust to receive us
at that Island, but this, I was told, would not be ready before Tuesday
next. Received from the Shore Fresh Beef and Greens for the Ship's
Company.

Monday, 15th. Fresh Sea and land breezes and fair weather. I had forgot
to mention, that upon our arrival here I had not one man upon the Sick
List; Lieut. Hicks, Mr. Green, and Tupia were the only people that had
any complaints occasioned by a long continuance at Sea.* (* This was an
achievement indeed, and Cook records it in this simple observation. Of
the many ships which had arrived at Batavia after voyages across the
Pacific, none but had come to an anchor with crews decimated and
enfeebled through scurvy. Hawksworth mentions, probably on the authority
of Banks, that when passing Torres Straits there were several incipient
cases of this disease in the Endeavour. The fresh provisions obtained at
Savu probably dissipated these symptoms, if they were symptoms; but Mr.
Perry, the surgeon, in his report, given in the Introduction, distinctly
states that there were no cases after leaving Tahiti.)

Tuesday, 16th. Finding, by a strict inquiry, that there were no private
person or persons in the place that could at this time advance me a
sufficient sum of money to defray the charge I might be at in repairing
and refitting the Ship--at least, if there were any, they would be afraid
to do it without leave from the Governor--wherefore I had nothing left
but to apply to the Governor himself, and accordingly drew up the
following request, which I laid before the Governor and Council this
morning, in consequence of which the Shebander had orders to supply me
with what money I wanted out of the Company's Treasure:--

"Lieutenant James Cook, Commander of His Brittannick Majesty's Bark the
Endeavour, begs leave to represent to His Excellency the Right Honourable
Petrus Albertus Van der Parra, Governor-General, etc., etc., That he will
be in want of a Sum or Sums of Money in order to defray the Charge he
will be at in repairing and refiting His Brittannick Majesty's Ship at
this place; which sum or sums of money he is directed by his
Instructions, and empower'd by his commission, to give Bills of Exchange
on the respective Offices which Superintend His Brittannick Majesty's
Navy.

"The said Lieutenant James Cook Requests of His Excellency, That he will
be pleased to order him to be supply'd with such sum or sums of money,
either out of the Company's Treasure, or permit such private persons to
do it as may be willing to advance money for Bills of Exchange on the
Honourable and Principal Officers and Commissioners of His Brittannick
Majesty's Navy, the Commissioners for Victualling His Majesty's Navy, and
the Commissioners for taking care of the Sick and Hurt.

"Dated on board His Brittannick Majesty's
Bark the Endeavour, in Batavia Road,
the 16th of October, 1770.

"JAMES COOK."

Wednesday, 17th. In the P.M. I waited upon the Superintendent of Onrust,
with an order from the Shebander, to receive us at that Island, but this
order, the Superintendent told me, was not sufficient to impower him to
give me the conveniences and assistance I wanted, and when I came to call
upon the Shebander, I found this mistake was owing to the word "heave
down" being wrong translated; this Circumstance, trifling as it is, will
cause a delay of some days, as it cannot be set to rights until next
Council day, which is not till Friday.

Thursday, 18th. In the P.M. received on board 2 live Oxen, 150 Gallons of
Arrack, 3 Barrels of Tar, and one of Pitch; at daylight in the A.M. took
up our Anchor and run down to Onrust.

At 9 Anchor'd in 7 fathoms off Coopers Island, which lies close to
Onrust. There are wharfs at both of these Islands, and ships land there
stores, sometimes on the one and sometimes on the other, but it is only
at Onrust where the proper conveniences are for heaving down. Soon after
we Anchor'd I went on shore to the Officer of the Yard, to see if they
could not allow us some place to land our stores, but this could not be
granted without orders.

Friday, 19th. In the P.M. I sent a Petty Officer to Mr. Hicks, who Lodges
ashore at Batavia for the recovery of his health, with orders to desire
him to wait upon the Shebander, in order to get the necessary orders
respecting us dispatched to this place as soon as possible.

Saturday, 20th. Employ'd unrigging the ship, etc.

Sunday, 21st. In the P.M. orders came down to the Officers of the yard to
comply with everything I wanted, but we could not yet get a Wharfe to
land our Stores, they being all taken up by shipping.

Monday, 22nd. In the A.M. two ships went from the Wharfes at Coopers
Island, when we prepared to go along side one of them.

Tuesday, 23rd. In the P.M. hauled along side one of the Wharfes, in order
to take out our stores, etc., after which the Ship is to be deliver'd
into the Charge of the proper Officers at Onrust, who will (as I am
inform'd) heave her down, and repair her, with their own people, while
ours must stand and look on, who, if we were permitted, could do every
thing wanting to the Ship ourselves.* (* Here Mr. Corner's copy of the
Journal ends abruptly. The record for the next day explains the reason,
and there is no doubt that this was the copy of the Journal sent home.
The Queen's copy ends on 10th October. The remainder of the Journal is
taken from the Admiralty copy.)

[Reports Sent Home from Batavia.]

Wednesday, 24th. Employ'd clearing the Ship, having a Store House to put
our Stores, etc., in. In the P.M. I went up to Town in order to put on
board the first Dutch Ship that Sails, a pacquet for the Admiralty
containing a Copy of my Journal, a Chart of the South Sea, another of New
Zeeland, and one of the East Coast of New Holland. In the morning the
General, accompanied by the Water Fiscall, some of the Council, and the
Commodore, each in their respective Boats, went out into the Road on
board the oldest Captain, in order to appoint him Commodore of the Fleet,
ready to Sail for Holland. The Ships was drawn up in 2 Lines, between
which the General past to the new Commodore's Ship, which lay the
farthest out. Each ship as he passed and repassed gave him 3 Cheers, and
as soon as he was on board, and the Dutch Flag Hoisted at the Main
Topmast Head, the other Commodore Saluted him with 21 Guns, and
immediately after Struck his Broad Pendant, which was again hoisted as
soon as the General left the other Ship; he was then Saluted with 17 Guns
by the new made Commodore, who now hoisted a Common Pendant. This
Ceremony of appointing a Commodore over the Grand Fleet, as they call it,
we were told is Yearly perform'd. I went out in my Boat on purpose to see
it, accompanied by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, because we were told it
was one of the Grandest sights Batavia afforded; that may be too, and yet
it did not recompense us for our trouble. I thought that the whole was
but ill conducted, and the Fleet appear'd to be very badly mann'd. This
fleet consists of 10 or 12 stout Ships; not only these, but all or most
of their other Ships are pierced for 50 Guns, but have only their upper
Tier mounted, and these are more by half than they have men to fight.

Thursday, 25th. In the evening I sent the Admiralty Packet on board the
Kronenburg, Captain Fredrick Kelger, Commodore, who, together with
another Ship, sails immediately for the Cape, where she waits for the
remainder of the Fleet.*

(* The following letter to the Secretary of the Admiralty (now in Public
Record Office) was also dispatched:--

"To Philip Stephens, Esq.

"Sir,

"Please to acquaint my Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty that I left
Rio de Janeiro the 8th of December, 1768, and on the 16th of January
following arrived in Success Bay in Straits La Maire, where we recruited
our Wood and Water; on the 21st of the same month we quitted Straits La
Maire, and arrived at George's Island on the 13th of April. In our
Passage to this Island I made a far more Westerly Track than any Ship had
ever done before; yet it was attended with no discovery until we arrived
within the Tropick, where we discovered several Islands. We met with as
Friendly a reception by the Natives of George's Island as I could wish,
and I took care to secure ourselves in such a manner as to put it out of
the power of the whole Island to drive us off. Some days preceeding the
3rd of June I sent Lieutenant Hicks to the Eastern part of this Island,
and Lieutenant Gore to York Island, with others of the Officers (Mr.
Green having furnished them with Instruments), to observe the Transit of
Venus, that we may have the better Chance of succeeding should the day
prove unfavourable; but in this We were so fortunate that the
observations were everywhere attended with every favourable Circumstance.
It was the 13th of July before I was ready to quitt this Island, after
which I spent near a month in exploring some other Islands which lay to
the Westward, before we steer'd to the Southward. On the 14th of August
we discovered a small Island laying in the Latitude of 22 degrees 27
minutes South, Longitude 150 degrees 47 minutes West. After quitting this
Island I steered to the South, inclining a little to the East, until we
arrived in the Latitude 40 degrees 12 minutes South, without seeing the
least signs of Land. After this I steer'd to the Westward, between the
Latitude of 30 and 40 degrees until the 6th of October, on which day we
discovered the East Coast of New Zeland, which I found to consist of 2
large Islands, extending from 34 to 48 degrees of South Latitude, both of
which I circumnavigated. On the 1st of April, 1770, I quitted New Zeland,
and steer'd to the Westward, until I fell in with the East Coast of New
Holland, in the Latitude of 30 degrees South. I coasted the shore of this
Country to the North, putting in at such places as I saw Convenient,
until we arrived in the Latitude of 15 degrees 45 minutes South, where,
on the night of the 10th of June, we struck upon a Reef of Rocks, were we
lay 23 Hours, and received some very considerable damage. This proved a
fatal stroke to the remainder of the Voyage, as we were obliged to take
shelter in the first Port we met with, were we were detain'd repairing
the damage we had sustain'd until the 4th of August, and after all put to
Sea with a leaky Ship, and afterwards coasted the Shore to the Northward
through the most dangerous Navigation that perhaps ever ship was in,
until the 22nd of same month, when, being in the Latitude of 10 degrees
30 minutes South, we found a Passage into the Indian Sea between the
Northern extremity of New Holland and New Guinea. After getting through
the Passage I stood for the Coast of New Guinea, which we made on the
29th; but as we found it absolutely necessary to heave the Ship down to
Stop her leaks before we proceeded home, I made no stay here, but quitted
this Coast on the 30th of September, and made the best of my way to
Batavia, where we Arrived on the 10th instant, and soon after obtained
leave of the Governor and Council to be hove down at Onrust, where we
have but just got alongside of the Wharf in order to take out our Stores,
etc.

"I send herewith a copy of my Journal, containing the Proceedings of the
whole Voyage, together with such Charts as I have had time to Copy, which
I judge will be sufficient for the present to illustrate said Journal. In
this Journal I have with undisguised truth and without gloss inserted the
whole Transactions of the Voyage, and made such remarks and have given
such discriptions of things as I thought was necessary in the best manner
I was Capable off. Altho' the discoverys made in this Voyage are not
great, yet I flatter myself they are such as may Merit the Attention of
their Lordships; and altho' I have failed in discovering the so much
talked of Southern Continent (which perhaps do not exist), and which I
myself had much at heart, yet I am confident that no part of the Failure
of such discovery can be laid to my charge. Had we been so fortunate not
to have run a shore much more would have been done in the latter part of
the Voyage than what was; but as it is, I presume this Voyage will be
found as compleat as any before made to the South Seas on the same
account. The plans I have drawn of the places I have been at were made
with all the Care and accuracy that time and Circumstances would admit
of. Thus far I am certain that the Latitude and Longitude of few parts of
the World are better settled than these. In this I was very much assisted
by Mr. Green, who let slip no one opportunity for making of Observations
for settling the Longitude during the whole Course of the Voyage; and the
many Valuable discoveries made by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander in Natural
History, and other things useful to the learned world, cannot fail of
contributing very much to the Success of the Voyage. In justice to the
Officers and the whole Crew, I must say they have gone through the
fatigues and dangers of the whole Voyage with that cheerfulness and
Allertness that will always do Honour to British Seamen, and I have the
satisfaction to say that I have not lost one Man by sickness during the
whole Voyage. I hope that the repairs wanting to the Ship will not be so
great as to detain us any length of time. You may be assured that I shall
make no unnecessary delay either here or at any other place, but shall
make the best of my way home. I have the Honour to be with the greatest
respect,

"Sir,

"Your most Obedient Humble Servant,

"(Signed) JAMES COOK.

"Endeavour Bark,
at Onrust, near Batavia,
the 23rd of October, 1770."

"Although the discoveries made in this voyage are not great." In these
modest words does Cook describe his work. I read them to mean that with
his love of accuracy he did not wish to claim his explorations of New
Zealand and the East Coast of Australia as discoveries, as it was already
known that lands existed there; but seeing how little was known, and how
completely he did his work, there are but few men who would have
refrained from classing them, as indeed he truly might have, as
discoveries.)

Friday, 26th. Set up the Ship's Tent for the reception of the Ship's
Company, several of them begin to be taken ill, owing, as I suppose, to
the extream hot weather.

[Heaving down at Batavia.]

Saturday, 27th. Employed getting out Stores, Ballast, etc.

Sunday, 28th. Employ'd as above.

Monday, 29th, Tuesday, 30th, Wednesday, 31st. Employ'd clearing the Ship.

[November 1770.]

Thursday, November 1st. Got every thing out of the Ship, and all clear
for going alongside of the Carreening, but about Noon I received a
message from the Officer at Onrust acquainting me that they could not
receive us there until they had first despatched the Ships bound to
Europe, which were down here taking in pepper.

Friday, 2nd, Saturday, 3rd, Sunday, 4th. Employ'd overhauling the
rigging, and making rope, making and repairing Sails.

Monday, 5th. Clear, hot sultry weather. In the A.M. transported the ship
over to Onrust, alongside one of the Carreening Wharfs.

Tuesday, 6th. In the A.M. the officers of the Yard took the Ship in hand,
and sent on board a number of Carpenters, Caulkers, Riggers, Slaves,
etc., to make ready to heave down.

Wednesday, 7th. Employ'd getting ready to heave down in the P.M. We had
the misfortune to loose Mr. Monkhouse, the Surgeon, who died at Batavia
of a Fever after a short illness, of which disease and others several of
our people are daily taken ill, which will make his loss be the more
severely felt; he was succeeded by Mr. Perry, his mate, who is equally as
well skilled in his profession.

Thursday, 8th. In the night had much Thunder, Lightning, and Rain; during
the day fair weather, which gave us time to get everything in readiness
for heaving down.

Friday, 9th. In the P.M. hove the Larboard side of the Ship, Kiel out,
and found her bottom to be in a far worse condition than we expected; the
false kiel was gone to within 20 feet of the Stern post, the main Kiel
wounded in many places very considerably, a great quantity of Sheathing
off, and several planks much damaged, especially under the Main Channell
near the Kiel, where 2 planks and a 1/2, near 6 feet in length, were
within 1/8th of an inch of being cutt through; and here the worms had
made their way quite into the timbers, so that it was a matter of
surprise to every one who saw her bottom how we had kept her above water,
and yet in this condition we had sailed some hundreds of Leagues, in as
dangerous a Navigation as in any part of the World, happy in being
ignorant of the continual danger we were in. In the evening righted the
Ship, having only time to patch up some of the worst places to prevent
the water getting in in large quantitys for the present. In the morning
hove her down again, and most of the Carpenters and Caulkers in the Yard
(which are not a few) were set to work upon her Bottom, and at the same
time a number of Slaves were employ'd bailing the water out of the Hold.
Our people, altho' they attend, were seldom called upon; indeed, by this
time we were so weakned by sickness that we could not muster above 20 Men
and Officers that were able to do duty, so little should we have been
able to have hove her down and repair'd her ourselves, as I at one time
thought us capable of.

Saturday, 10th. In the P.M. we were obliged to righten the ship before
night, by reason of her making water in her upper works faster than we
could free; it made it necessary to have her weather works inside and out
caulked, which before was thought unnecessary.

Sunday, 11th. In the A.M., having caulked her upper works, hove out the
Larboard side again, which a number of Workmen were employ'd repairing.

Monday, 12th. In the P.M. finished the Larboard side, and in the A.M.
began to get ready to heave out the other.

Tuesday, 13th. This day they hove the Starboard side Kiel out, which we
found very little damaged, and was therefore soon done with.

Wednesday, 14th. Employ'd clearing the Ship of the Carreening gear, her
bottom being now thoroughly repair'd, and very much to my satisfaction.
In justice to the Officers and Workmen of this Yard, I must say that I do
not believe that there is a Marine Yard in the World where work is done
with more alertness than here, or where there are better conveniences for
heaving Ships down both in point of safety and despatch. Here they heave
down by 2 masts, which is not now Practised by the English; but I hold it
to be much safer and more expeditious than by heaving down by one mast; a
man must not only be strongly bigotted to his own customs, but in some
measure divested of reason, that will not allow this, after seeing with
how much ease and safety the Dutch at Onrust heave down their largest
ships.

Thursday, 15th. In the A.M. transported the Ship from Onrust to Cooper's
Island, and moored her alongside the Wharf.

Friday, 16th. Employ'd taking in Coals and Ballast; sent one of the
decay'd Pumps up to Batavia to have a new one made by it.

Saturday, 17th, Sunday, 18th, Monday, 19th, Tuesday, 20th, Wednesday,
21st, Thursday, 22nd, Friday, 23rd, Saturday, 24th, Sunday, 25th.
Employ'd rigging the Ship, getting on board Stores and Water, which last
we have sent from Batavia at the rate of Six shillings and 8 pence a
Leager, or 150 Gallons. We are now become so sickly that we seldom can
muster above 12 or 14 hands to do duty.

Monday, 26th. In the night had much rain, after which the Westerly
Monsoons set in, which blow here generally in the night from the
South-West or from the land, in the day from the North-West or North.

Tuesday, 27th, Wednesday, 28th, Thursday, 29th, Friday, 30th, [December
1770.] Saturday, December 1st, Sunday, 2nd, Monday, 3rd, Tuesday, 4th,
Wednesday, 5th, Thursday, 6th, Friday, 7th. Employ'd getting on board
Stores, Provisions, Water, rigging the Ship, repairing and bending the
Sails. On the last of these days, having got all the Sick on board, and
every other thing from the Island, we hauled off from the Wharfe with a
design to run up to Batavia road, but the Wind proving scant obliged us
to lay at anchor.

[At Batavia.]

Saturday, 8th. Fresh breezes Westerly, and fair weather. At 10 A.M.
weigh'd and run up to Batavia road, where we anchor'd in 4 1/2 fathoms
water.

Sunday, 9th. First and latter parts ditto weather, middle squally with
rain. In the P.M. sent on shore a Boat load of empty casks, and at the
same time went myself in order to forward the things we wanted, and in
the evening sent on board the new Pump, with some other stores that were
immediately wanting.

Monday, 10th. For the most part Squally, with rain; the people employ'd
scraping the paint work.

Tuesday, 11th, Wednesday, 12th, Thursday, 13th, Friday, 14th. For the
most part of these days fair weather. Employ'd taking on board Provisions
and Water; this last is put on board at 5 shillings a Leager or 150
Gallons.

Saturday, 15th. In the P.M. anchor'd here the Earl of Elgin, Captain
Cooke, an English East India Company Ship from Madras, bound to China,
but having lost her passage, put in here to wait for the next Season.

Sunday, 16th, Monday, 17th. Employ'd taking on board Provisions; Scraping
and Painting the Ship.

Tuesday, 18th. Gentle breezes and fair weather. Anchored here the
Phoenix, Captain Black, an English Country Ship from Bencoolen.

Wednesday, 19th, Thursday, 20th, Friday, 21st, Saturday, 22nd, Sunday,
23rd, Monday, 24th. Fresh breezes, and for the most part fair weather.
Completed taking on board Provisions, Water, etc., and getting the Ship
ready for sea.

Tuesday, 25th. Having now compleatly refitted the ship, and taken in a
sufficient quantity of Provisions of all kinds, I this afternoon took
leave of the General, and such others of the principal Gentlemen as I had
any connection with, all of whom upon every occasion gave me all the
assistance I required. A small dispute, however, now hapned between me
and some of the Dutch Naval Officers about a Seaman that had run from one
of the Dutch Ships in the Road, and enter'd on board mine; this man the
General demanded as a Subject of Holland, and I promised to deliver him
up provided he was not an English Subject, and sent the necessary orders
on board for that purpose. In the morning the Commodore's Captain came
and told me that he had been on board my ship for the man, but that the
Officer had refused to give him up, alledging that he was an Englishman,
and that he, the Captain, was just then come from the General to demand
the man of me as a Deanish Subject, he standing upon their Ship's books
as born at Elsinore. I told him that I believed there must be some
mistake in the General's message, for I apprehended he would not demand a
Deanish Seaman from me who had committed no other crime than preferring
the English Service before that of the Dutch; but to convince him how
unwilling I was to disoblige any one concerned, I had sent orders on
board to deliver the man to him in case he was found to be a Foreigner;
but as that was not done I suspected that the man was a Subject of
England, and if I found him to be such I was resolved to keep him. Soon
after this I received a letter from Mr. Hicks, which I carried to the
Shabander, and desired that it might be shewn to the General, and at the
same time to acquaint him that, after my having such unanswerable proof
of the man's being an English Subject, as was mentioned in that letter,
it was impossible for me to deliver him up. After this I heard no more
about it.

Wednesday, 26th. In the P.M. myself, Mr. Banks, and all the Gentlemen
came on board, and at 6 a.m. weigh'd and came to sail with a light breeze
at South-West. The Elgin Indiaman saluted us with 3 cheers and 13 Guns,
and soon after the Garrison with 14, both of which we return'd. Soon
after this the Sea breeze set in at North by West, which obliged us to
Anchor just without the Ships in the Road. The number of Sick on board at
this time amounts to 40 or upwards, and the rest of the Ship's Company
are in a weakly condition, having been every one sick except the
Sailmaker, an old Man about 70 or 80 years of age; and what is still more
extraordinary in this man is his being generally more or less drunk every
day. But notwithstanding this general sickness, we lost but 7 men in the
whole: the Surgeon, 3 Seamen, Mr. Green's Servant, and Tupia and his
Servant, both of which fell a sacrifice to this unwholesome climate
before they had reached the object of their wishes. Tupia's death,
indeed, cannot be said to be owing wholy to the unwholesome air of
Batavia; the long want of a Vegetable Diet, which he had all his life
before been used to, had brought upon him all the Disorders attending a
Sea life. He was a shrewd, sensible, ingenious man, but proud and
obstinate, which often made his situation on board both disagreeable to
himself and those about him, and tended much to promote the diseases
which put a Period to his Life.* (* It is rather curious that Cook does
not here record his sense of the value of Tupia's services as
interpreter, which he has before alluded to in the Journal. There is no
doubt that his presence on board when the ship was in New Zealand was the
greatest advantage, affording a means of communication with the natives,
which prevented the usual gross misunderstandings which arise as to the
object of the visit of an exploring ship. Without him, even with Cook's
humane intention and good management, friendly relations would have been
much more difficult to establish.)

[Description of Batavia.]

Batavia is a place that hath been so often visited by Europeans, and so
many accounts of it extant, that any discription I could give would seem
unnecessary; besides, I have neither abilities nor materials sufficient
for such an undertaking, for whoever gives a faithful account of this
place must in many things contradict all the Authors I have had an
opportunity to consult; but this task I shall leave to some abler hand,
and only take notice of such things that seem to me necessary for Seamen
to know.

The City of Batavia is situated on a low flatt near the Sea, in the
Bottom of a large Bay of the same name, which lies on the North side of
Java, about 8 Leagues from the Straits of Sunda; it lies in 6 degrees 10
minutes South Latitude, and 106 degrees 50 minutes East Longitude from
the Meridian of Greenwich, settled by Astronomical Observations made on
the spot by the Reverend Mr. Mohr, who has built a very ellegant
Observatory, which is as well furnished with Instruments as most in
Europe. Most of the Streets in the City have canals of water running
through them, which unite into one Stream about 1/2 a mile before they
discharge themselves into the Sea; this is about 100 feet broad, and is
built far enough out into the Sea to have at its entrance a sufficient
depth of Water to admit Small Craft, Luggage boats, etc. The
communication between the Sea and the City is by this Canal alone, and
this only in the day; for it is shut up every night by a Boom, through
which no Boats can pass from about 6 o'clock in the evening to between 5
and 6 the next morning. Here stands the Custom house, where all goods,
either imported or exported, pay the Customary Dutys; at least, an
Account is here taken of them, and nothing can pass without a Permit,
wether it pays duty or no. All kinds of refreshments, Naval Stores, and
Sea Provisions are to be had here; but there are few Articles but what
bear a very high Price, especially if you take them of the Company, which
you are obliged to do if you want any Quantity; that is, of such Articles
as they monoplie to themselves, which are all manner of Naval Stores and
Salted Provisions.

The Road of Batavia, or place where Shipping Anchor, lies right before
the City, and is so large as to contain any number of Shipping. You
anchor with the Dome of the Great Church, bearing about South in 7, 6, or
5 fathoms water, about 1 1/2 or 2 miles from the Shore; and nearer you
cannot come with Large Ships, by reason of a Mud bank which lines all the
Shore of the Bay. The ground that you Anchor in is of such a nature that
the Anchors buries themselves so deep that it is with difficulty they are
got out; for this reason Ships always lays at Single Anchor, being in no
manner of danger of fouling them. You lay apparently open to the winds
from the North-West to the East-North-East; but the Sea that is caused by
these winds is a good deal broke before it reaches the Road by the small
Islands and Shoals without. These Shoals have all of them either Buoys or
Beacons upon them; but if these Guides should be moved, there is a very
good Chart of this Bay and the Coast of Java as far as the Straits of
Sunda, bound up in the English East India Pilot, sold by Mount & Page. In
this Chart everything seems to be very accurately delineated.

Fresh water and wood for fuel must be purchased here. The water is put on
board the Ship in the Road at a Spanish Dollar, or 5 shillings a Leager,
containing 150 Gallons; but if sent to Onrust, which is one League from
the Road, it cost a Duccatoon, or 6 shillings 8 pence. The supplying
shipping with water, especially Foreigners, is a perquisite of the
Commodore, who is always an Officer in the State's Service, but acts here
under the Company. He takes care to tell you that the Water is very good,
and will keep sweet at Sea; whereas everybody else tells you that it is
not so.

Be this as it will, Batavia is certainly a place that Europeans need not
covet to go to; but if necessity obliges them, they will do well to make
their stay as short as possible, otherwise they will soon feel the
effects of the unwholesome air of Batavia, which, I firmly believe, is
the Death of more Europeans than any other place upon the Globe of the
same extent. Such, at least, is my opinion of it, which is founded on
facts. We came in here with as healthy a Ship's Company as need go to
Sea, and after a stay of not quite 3 months left it in the condition of
an Hospital Ship, besides the loss of 7 men; and yet all the Dutch
Captains I had an opportunity to converse with said that we had been very
lucky, and wondered that we had not lost half our people in that time.*
(* Batavia bears an evil reputation for health to this day; but it must
be remembered that the Endeavour lay there during the rainy or most
unhealthy season.)


CHAPTER 10. BATAVIA TO CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.

[December 1770.]

THURSDAY, 27th. Moderate breezes at West and North-West, with fair
weather. At 6 a.m. weighed, and stood out to Sea; at Noon the Island of
Edam bore North by East, distant 3 miles.

Friday, 28th. Winds variable between the North and West. At 6 in the
Evening anchored in 13 fathoms, Edam Island bearing East, distant 1 1/2
miles. At day light in the morning weighed again, and keept plying to
windward between Edam and Duffin's Island, but gained very little owing
to the variableness of the winds.

Saturday, 29th. In the P.M. anchored in 12 fathoms water in the Evening
until daylight, when we got again under Sail, with the wind at
West-South-West, and stood out North-West for the Thousand Islands.
Before noon the wind veer'd to North-West, and we endeavour'd to turn
through between Pulo Pare and Wapping Island.

Sunday, 30th. After making a short trip to the North-East, we tacked, and
weather'd Pulo Pare, and stood in for the Main, having the wind at
North-West, a fresh breeze. We fetched Maneaters Island (a small island
laying under the Main midway between Batavia and Bantam) after making a
trip to the North-East, and finding that we lost ground, we stood in
shore again and anchored in 13 fathoms, the above mentioned Island
bearing South-West by West, distant 1 mile, and in one with Bantam Hill.
At 7 A.M. weighed, with the wind at West-South-West, and stood to the
North-West, and weather'd Wapping Island, having the current in our
favour.

Monday, 31st. At 1 P.M. the wind veer'd to the Northward; we tack and
stood to the Westward, and weather'd Pulo Baby. In the Evening Anchor'd
between this Island and Bantam Bay, the Island bearing North, distant 2
miles, and Bantam Point West; at 5 a.m. weighed with the wind at West by
South, which afterwards proved variable; at noon Bantam Point South-West
1/2 West, distant 3 Leagues.

JANUARY, 1771.

Tuesday, 1st. In the P.M. stood over for the Sumatra Shore, having the
wind at South-South-West, a fresh breeze, and the current in our favour;
but this last shifted and set to the Eastward in the Evening, and obliged
us to Anchor in 30 fathoms, under the Islands which lay off Verekens
point, which point constitutes the narrowest part of the Straits of
Sunda. Here we found the current set to the South-West the most part of
the night; at 5 a.m. weigh'd with the wind at North-West, and stood to
the South-West between the Island Thwart-the-way and Sumatra; the wind
soon after coming to the westward we stood over for the Java Shore. At
noon the South point of Peper Bay bore South-West by South, and Anger
Point North-East 1/2 East, distant 2 Leagues; tacked and stood to the
North-West.

Wednesday, 2nd. First and middle parts fresh breezes at South-West, and
fair the remainder, squally with rain; plying to windward between
Cracatoa and the Java shore without gaining anything.

Thursday, 3rd. In the P.M. had it very squally, with heavy showers of
rain; at 1/2 past 7 anchor'd in 19 fathoms, Cracatoa Island South-West,
distance 3 Leagues. In the morning came to sail, having very squally
variable weather; at Noon Cracatoa West 2 Leagues.

Friday, 4th. Most part of these 24 hours squally, rainy weather, winds
variable between the North-North-West and South-South-West; at 5 p.m.
anchor'd in 28 fathoms water, Cracatoa West, distant 3 miles. Some time
after the wind veer'd to North-West, with which we got under sail, but
the wind dying away we advanced but little to the South-West before noon,
at which time Princes Island bore South-West, distance 8 or 9 Leagues.

Saturday, 5th. Had fresh breezes at South-West, with squally, rainy
weather until the evening, when it clear up, and the wind veer'd to South
and South-East, with which we stood to the South-West all night. In the
morning the wind veer'd to North-East, which was still in our favour; at
noon Princes Island bore West 1/2 South, distant 3 Leagues.

[At Anchor. Princes Island, Sunda Strait.]

Sunday, 6th. At 3 o'clock in the P.M. anchor'd under the South-East side
of Princes Island in 18 fathoms water, in order to recruite our wood and
water, and to procure refreshments for the people, which are now in a
much worse state of health than when we left Batavia. After coming to an
anchor I went on shore to look at the watering place, and to speak with
the Natives, some of whom were upon the Beach. I found the watering place
convenient, and the water to all appearance good, Provided proper care is
taken in the filling of it. The Natives seemed inclined to supply us with
Turtle, Fowls, etc.; Articles that I intended laying in as great a stock
as possible for the benefit of the Sick, and to suffer every one to
purchase what they pleased for themselves, as I found these people as
easy to traffick with as Europeans. In the morning sent the Gunner ashore
with some hands to fill water, while others were empboy'd putting the
whole to rights, sending on shore Empty Casks, etc. Served Turtle to the
Ship's Company. Yesterday was the only Salt meat day they have had since
our arrival at Java, which is now near 4 months.

Monday, 7th. From this day till Monday 14th we were employ'd wooding and
watering, being frequently interrupted by heavy rains. Having now
compleated both we hoisted in the Long boat, and made ready to put to
Sea, having on board a pretty good stock of refreshments, which we
purchased of the natives, such as Turtle, Fowls, Fish, two species of
Deer, one about as big as a small sheep, the other no bigger than a
Rabbit; both sorts eat very well, but are only for present use, as they
seldom lived above 24 hours in our possession. We likewise got fruit of
several sorts, such as Cocoa Nutts, plantains, Limes, etc. The Trade on
our part was carried on chiefly with money (Spanish Dollars); the natives
set but little value upon any thing else. Such of our people as had not
this Article traded with Old Shirts, etc., at a great disadvantage.

[Batavia to Capetown.]

Tuesday, 15th. Had variable light airs of wind, with which we could not
get under sail until the morning, when we weighed with a light breeze at
North-East, which was soon succeeded by a calm.

Wednesday, 16th. Had it calm all P.M., which at 5 o'clock obliged us to
Anchor under the South Point of Princes Island, the said Point bearing
South-West by West, distance 2 miles. At 8 o'clock in the A.M. a light
breeze sprung up at North, with which we weigh'd and stood out to Sea. At
noon Java Head bore South-East by South, distance 2 Leagues, and the West
Point of Princes Island North-North-West, distance 5 Leagues; Latitude
Observed 6 degrees 45 minutes South. Java Head, from which I take my
departure, lies in the Latitude of 6 degrees 49 minutes South, and
Longitude 255 degrees 12 minutes West from the Meridian of Greenwich,
deduced from several Astronomical Observations made at Batavia by the
Reverend Mr. Mohr.* (* The true longitude of Java Head is 254 degrees 49
minutes West.)

Thursday, 17th. Little wind and fair at 6 p.m. Java head bore
East-North-East, distant 4 or 5 Leagues; at 6 a.m. it bore
North-North-East, 12 Leagues. Wind North-East; course South 27 degrees 15
minutes West; distance 48 miles; latitude 7 degrees 32 minutes South;
longitude 255 degrees 35 minutes West.

Friday, 18th. Light Airs and Calms, with Showers of Rain. Wind Variable;
course South-West 1/2 South; distance 30 miles; latitude 7 degrees 55
minutes South; longitude 255 degrees 54 minutes West.

Saturday, 19th. For the most part of these 24 hours had little wind and
fair weather. Wind Westerly; course South 3 degrees East; distance 53
miles; latitude 8 degrees 48 minutes South; longitude 255 degrees 51
minutes West.

Sunday, 20th. Light Airs and Calms, with some Showers of Rain. Saw 2 Sail
in the North-West Quarter standing to the South-West; one of them shew'd
Dutch Colours. Wind North Westerly; course South 44 degrees West;
distance 36 miles; latitude 9 degrees 14 minutes South; longitude 256
degrees 15 minutes West.

Monday, 21st. First part Little wind, the remainder a Gentle breeze; the
2 Sail in sight. Wind Easterly; course South 57 degrees West; distance 58
miles; latitude 9 degrees 46 minutes South; longitude 257 degrees 5
minutes West.

Tuesday, 22nd. Little wind and fair weather. Wind South-Westerly; course
North 10 degrees West; distance 17 miles; latitude 9 degrees 29 minutes
South; longitude 257 degrees 8 minutes West.

Wednesday, 23rd. Ditto weather; a swell from the Southward, and which we
have had ever since we left the Straits of Sunda. Wind Ditto; course East
Southerly; distance 18 miles; latitude 9 degrees 30 minutes South;
longitude 256 degrees 50 minutes West.

Thursday, 24th. First part Light Airs, the remainder Calm. In the A.M.
died John Trusslove, Corporal of Marines, a man much esteem'd by every
body on board. Many of our people at this time lay dangerously ill of
Fevers and Fluxes. We are inclinable to attribute this to the water we
took in at Princes Island, and have put lime into the Casks in order to
purifie it. Wind South-West by South to South-South-East; course South;
distance 4 miles; latitude 9 degrees 34 minutes South; longitude 256
degrees 50 minutes West.

Friday, 25th. Light Airs and Calms; hot, sultry weather. Departed this
life Mr. Sporing, a Gentleman belonging to Mr Banks's retinue. Wind
Variable and Calms; course South 30 degrees East; distance 12 miles;
latitude 9 degrees 44 minutes South; longitude 256 degrees 44 minutes
West.

Saturday, 26th. First part little wind, the remainder calm and very hot;
set up the Topmast Rigging, and clear'd ship between Decks, and wash her
with Vinegar. Wind South Westerly; course South-East; distance 17 miles;
latitude 9 degrees 56 minutes South; longitude 256 degrees 32 minutes
West.

Sunday, 27th. Little wind, and sometimes calm. In the evening found the
Variation to be 2 degrees 51 minutes West. Departed this life Mr. Sydney
Parkinson, Natural History Painter to Mr. Banks, and soon after John
Ravenhill, Sailmaker, a man much advanced in years. Wind Variable; course
South 30 degrees West; distance 19 miles; latitude 10 degrees 12 minutes
South; longitude 256 degrees 41 minutes West.

Monday, 28th. Moderate breezes, with some Squalls, attended with Showers
of Rain. Wind West-North-West, North-East; course South 43 degrees West;
distance 66 miles; latitude 11 degrees 0 minutes South; longitude 257
degrees 27 West.

Tuesday, 29th. Very variable weather; sometimes squally, with rain, other
times little wind and calms. In the Night died Mr. Charles Green, who was
sent out by the Royal Society to observe the Transit of Venus. He had
long been in a bad state of health, which he took no care to repair, but,
on the contrary, lived in such a manner as greatly promoted the disorders
he had had long upon him; this brought on the Flux, which put a period to
his life. Wind North Westerly; course South 40 degrees West; distance 74
miles; latitude 11 degrees 57 minutes South; longitude 258 degrees 15
minutes West.

Wednesday, 30th. First and Latter parts moderate breezes and Cloudy
weather; the middle Squally, with rain, Thunder, and Lightning. Died of
the Flux Samuel Moody and Francis Haite, 2 of the Carpenter's Crew. Wind
Easterly; course South 40 degrees West; distance 67 miles; latitude 12
degrees 48 minutes South; longitude 258 degrees 59 minutes West.

Thursday, 31st. First part Moderate and fair, the remainder frequent
Squalls, attended with Showers of Rain. In the course of this 24 Hours we
have had 4 men died of the Flux, viz., John Thompson, Ship's Cook;
Benjamin Jordan, Carpenter's Mate; James Nickolson and Archibald Wolf,
Seamen; a melancholy proof of the calamitieous situation we are at
present in, having hardly well men enough to tend the Sails and look
after the Sick, many of whom are so ill that we have not the least hopes
of their recovery. Wind East-South-East; course South-West; distance 80
miles; latitude 13 degrees 42 minutes South; longitude 259 degrees 55
minutes West.

[February 1771.]

Friday, February 1st. Fresh Gales, with flying showers of rain. Clean'd
between Decks, and washed with Vinegar. Wind South-East by South; course
South 58 1/2 degrees West; distance 119 miles; latitude 14 degrees 44
minutes South; longitude 261 degrees 40 minutes West.

Saturday, 2nd. A Fresh Trade, and mostly fair weather. Departed this life
Daniel Roberts, Gunner's Servant, who died of the Flux. Since we have had
a fresh Trade Wind this fatal disorder hath seem'd to be at a stand; yet
there are several people which are so far gone, and brought so very low
by it, that we have not the least hopes of their recovery. Wind
East-South-East; course South 61 degrees West; distance 131 miles;
latitude 15 degrees 48 minutes South; longitude 264 degrees 16 minutes
West.

Sunday, 3rd. Ditto weather. In the Evening found the variation to be 2
degrees 56 minutes West. Departed this life John Thurman, Sailmaker's
Assistant. Wind Ditto; course South 65 degrees West; distance 128 miles;
latitude 16 degrees 40 minutes South; longitude 266 degrees 16 West.

Monday, 4th. A fresh Trade and hazey weather, with some Squalls, attended
with Small Rain; unbent the Main Topsail to repair, and bent another. In
the night died of the Flux Mr. John Bootie, Midshipman, and Mr. John
Gathrey, Boatswain. Wind South-East; course South 69 degrees West;
distance 141 miles; latitude 17 degrees 30 minutes South; longitude 268
degrees 32 minutes West.

Tuesday, 5th. A fresh Trade wind, and hazey, cloudy weather. Employ'd
repairing Sails; appointed Samuel Evans, one of the Boatswain's Mates,
and Coxswain of the Pinnace, to be Boatswain, in the room of Mr. Gathrey,
deceased, and order'd a Survey to be taken of the Stores. Wind East by
South; course West 15 degrees South; distance 141 miles; latitude 18
degrees 6 minutes South; longitude 270 degrees 54 minutes West.

Wednesday, 6th. A Fresh Trade wind and fair weather. In the night died
Mr. John Monkhouse, Midshipman, and Brother to the late Surgeon. Wind
South-East; course West 12 degrees South; distance 126 miles; latitude 18
degrees 30 minutes South; longitude 272 degrees 28 minutes West.

Thursday, 7th. Gentle Gales, with some Showers in the night. In the
Evening found the variation to be 3 degrees 24 minutes West, and in the
Morning I took several observations of the Sun and Moon, the mean result
of which, carried on to Noon, gave 276 degrees 19 minutes West Longitude
from Greenwich, which is 2 degrees to the Westward of that given by the
Log; this, I believe, is owing to a following Sea, which I have not as
yet allowed, for I judge it to be 6 miles a day since we have had the
South-East Trade wind. Wind South-East; course South 75 degrees 15
minutes West; distance 110 miles; latitude 18 degrees 58 minutes South;
longitude 274 degrees 20 minutes per Log, 276 degrees 19 minutes per
Observation.

Friday, 8th. Winds as Yesterday; clear weather in the day, and Showrey in
the Night. In the morning took Observations again of the Sun and Moon,
the mean result of which, reduced to noon, gave 278 degrees 50 minutes
West, which is 2 degrees 31 minutes West of Yesterday's Observation; the
log gives 2 degrees 20 minutes. Wind South-East; course South 78 degrees
West; distance 127 miles; latitude 19 degrees 24 minutes South; longitude
276 degrees 40 minutes per Log, 278 degrees 50 minutes per Observation.

Saturday, 9th. Gentle Gales and fair weather in the morning. Saw a Ship
on our Larboard Quarter, which hoisted Dutch Colours. Wind South-East;
course South 74 degrees 30 minutes West; distance 127 miles; latitude 19
degrees 58 minutes South.

Sunday, 10th. Fresh breezes and Hazey weather. Lost sight in the night of
the Dutch Ship, she having out sail'd us. Wind South-East quarter; course
South 77 degrees 15 minutes West; distance 136 miles; latitude 20 degrees
28 minutes South; longitude 281 degrees 12 minutes West.

Monday, 11th. Winds and weather as Yesterday. Some hands constantly
employ'd repairing Sails. Wind Ditto; course South 75 degrees West;
distance 126 miles; latitude 20 degrees 58 minutes South; longitude 283
degrees 22 minutes West.

Tuesday, 12th. Gentle breezes and fair weather. At 7 a.m. died of the
Flux, after a long and painful illness, Mr. John Satterly, Carpenter, a
man much Esteem'd by me and every Gentleman on board. In his room I
appoint George Nowell, one of the Carpenter's Crew, having only him and
one more left. Wind South-South-East; course South 71 minutes West;
distance 83 miles; latitude 21 degrees 25 minutes South; longitude 284
degrees 46 minutes West.

Wednesday, 13th. Weather as Yesterday. Employ'd Surveying the Carpenter's
Stores and repairing Sails. Wind Ditto; course South 72 degrees 30
minutes West; distance 87 miles; latitude 21 degrees 51 minutes South;
longitude 286 degrees 15 minutes West.

Thursday, 14th. Moderate breezes and Cloudy, with some Showers of Rain.
Variation per Azimuth 4 degrees 10 minutes West. Died Alexander Lindsay,
Seaman; this man was one of those we got at Batavia, and had been some
time in India. Winds Ditto; course South 73 degrees 15 minutes West;
distance 105 miles; latitude 22 degrees 21 minutes South; longitude 288
degrees 3 minutes West.

Friday, 15th. Ditto Weather. Died of the Flux Daniel Preston, Marine.
Wind South-East by East; course South 81 degrees 15 minutes West;
distance 123 miles; latitude 22 degrees 40 minutes; longitude 290 degrees
15 minutes West.

Saturday, 16th. A Fresh Trade and Cloudy weather. Employ'd repairing
Sails, rigging, etc. Wind Ditto; course South 84 degrees West; distance
115 miles; latitude 22 degrees 52 minutes South; longitude 292 degrees 20
minutes West.

Sunday, 17th. Fresh Gales, with some Showers of rain. Variation per
Azimuth 10 degrees 20 minutes Westerly. Wind South-East by South; course
South 79 degrees 45 minutes West; distance 157 miles; latitude 23 degrees
20 minutes South; longitude 295 8 minutes West.

Monday, 18th. Fair and pleasant weather. Wind South-East by East; course
South 75 degrees 30 minutes West; distance 148 miles; latitude 23 degrees
57 minutes South; longitude 297 degrees 46 minutes West.

Tuesday, 19th. Ditto weather. Wind South-East by East and South; course
South 77 degrees West; distance 130 miles; latitude 24 degrees 26 minutes
South; longitude 300 degrees 5 minutes West.

Wednesday, 20th. Fresh Gales and clear weather. Variation per Azimuth 12
degrees 15 minutes West. This morning the Carpenter and his Mate set
about repairing the Long boat, being the first day they have been able to
work since we left Princes Island. Wind South; course South 75 degrees 45
minutes West; distance 127 miles; latitude 24 degrees 57 minutes South;
longitude 302 degrees 21 minutes West.

Thursday, 21st. First and middle parts fair weather; Latter Squally,
attended with Showers of Rain. Between 2 and 3 o'Clock p.m. took several
Observations of the Sun and Moon; the mean result of them gave 306
degrees 33 minutes West Longitude from Greenwich, which is 1 degree 55
minutes West of account, and corresponds very well with the last
Observations, for at that time the Ship was 2 degrees 10 minutes West of
account. In the Night died of the Flux Alexander Simpson, a very good
Seaman. In the Morning punished Thomas Rossiter with 12 lashes for
getting Drunk, grossly assaulting the Officer of the Watch, and beating
some of the Sick. Wind South to East-South-East; course West by South;
distance 126 miles; latitude 25 degrees 21 minutes South; longitude 304
degrees 39 minutes per Account, 306 degrees 34 minutes per Observation.

Friday, 22nd. Fresh Trade and fair weather. Nothing remarkable. Wind
South-East by South; course South 70 degrees 45 minutes West; distance
133 miles; latitude 26 degrees 5 minutes South; longitude 306 degrees 59
minutes West, 308 degrees 54 minutes per Observation.

Saturday, 23rd. Ditto Winds and weather. Variation per Evening Amplitude
17 degrees 30 minutes West. Wind Ditto; course South 64 degrees 14
minutes West; distance 124 miles; latitude 26 degrees 59 minutes;
longitude 309 degrees 6 minutes West, 311 degrees 28 minutes per
Observation.

Sunday, 24th. Gentle breezes and fair weather. In the A.M. took the
opportunity of a fine morning to stay the Main Mast, and set up the
Topmast Rigging. Saw an Albatross. Wind Ditto; course South 66 degrees 45
minutes West; distance 117 miles; latitude 27 degrees 45 minutes South;
longitude 311 degrees 7 minutes West, 313 degrees 41 minutes per
Observation.

Monday, 25th. Gentle Gales, and fair weather. Variation per Evening
Azimuth 24 degrees 20 minutes West, and by the Morning Amplitude 24
degrees West Longitude; by Observation of the [circle around a dot, sun]
and [crescent, moon] is 3 degrees to the Westwarn of the Log, which shews
that the Ship has gain'd upon the Log 1 degree 5 minutes in 3 Days, in
which time we have always found the Observ'd Latitude to the Southward of
that given by the Log. These Joint Observations proves that there must be
a current setting between the South and West. Wind East by South; course
South 58 degrees 30 minutes West; distance 122 miles; latitude 28 degrees
49 minutes South; longitude 313 degrees 6 minutes West, 316 degrees 6
minutes per Observation.

Tuesday, 26th. Fresh Gales. Variation by Azimuth in the Evening 26
degrees 10 minutes West. Wind South-East by East; course South 82 degrees
West; distance 122 miles; latitude 29 degrees 6 minutes South; longitude
315 degrees 24 minutes West.

Wednesday, 27th. Ditto Gales and Cloudy. In the A.M. died of the Flux
Henry Jeffs, Emanuel Parreyra, and Peter Morgan, Seamen; the last came
Sick on board at Batavia, of which he never recover'd, and the other 2
had long been past all hopes of recovery, so that the death of these 3
men in one day did not in the least alarm us.* (* These were the last
deaths directly attributable to the dysentery contracted at Batavia.
Though always enjoying an unenviable reputation, Batavia seems to have
had, this year, a more unhealthy season than usual. The Endeavour lost
seven persons while at Batavia, and twenty-three after sailing up to this
date.) On the contrary, we are in hopes that they will be the last that
will fall a sacrifice to this fatal disorder, for such as are now ill of
it are in a fair way of recovering. Wind East by South, East by
North-North-East; course South 77 degrees 15 minutes West; distance 108
miles; latitude 29 degrees 30 minutes South; longitude 317 degrees 25
minutes West.

Thursday, 28th. Moderate breezes and fair weather until near 5 o'Clock in
the A.M., when a heavy Squall from the South-West, attended with rain,
took us all aback, and obliged us to put before the wind, the better to
take in our Sails; but before this could be done the Foretopsail was
split in several places. By 6 o'clock the Topsails and Mainsail were
handed, and we brought too under the Foresail and Mizen; at 8 it fell
more moderate, and we set the Mainsail, and brought another Foretopsail
to the Yard; at Noon had strong Gales and Cloudy weather. Wind North-East
by East, North, and South-West; course South 85 1/2 degrees West;
distance 88 miles; latitude 29 degrees 37 minutes South; longitude 319
degrees 5 minutes West.

[March 1771.]

Friday, March 1st. Fresh Gales and Cloudy. Found the Bitts which secures
the foot of the Bowsprit, loose; this obliged us to put before the wind
until they were secured in the best manner our situation would admit;
this done, we hauld our wind again to the Westward under the Courses and
close Reef'd Topsails. Wind South-West to South by West; course South 86
degrees 45 minutes West; distance 71 miles; latitude 29 degrees 41
minutes South; longitude 320 degrees 26 minutes West.

Saturday, 2nd. First part fresh Gales and Cloudy; remainder little wind,
with some few showers of rain; a Sea from the South-West. Wind Southerly;
course South 60 degrees West; distance 80 miles; latitude 30 degrees 21
minutes South; longitude 321 degrees 46 minutes West.

Sunday, 3rd. First part little wind; remainder Gentle gales and clear
weather, and the Sea pretty smooth. Wind North-East; course South 58
degrees 15 minutes West; distance 71 miles; latitude 31 degrees 1 minute
South; longitude 323 degrees 2 minutes West.

Monday, 4th. In the P.M. had a moderate breeze, which continued until 5
o'clock in the A.M., when it fell calm, and soon after a breeze sprung up
at South-West. In the Evening, and most part of the Night, the weather
was dark and cloudy, with much Lightning to the Westward. Variation 25
degrees 35 minutes West. Winds North-East to South-West; course South 67
degrees 45 minutes West; distance 87 miles; latitude 31 degrees 54
minutes South; longitude 324 degrees 36 minutes West.

[Off Coast of Natal.]

Tuesday, 5th. Fresh Gales from the South-South-West, with squally, rainy
weather, with which we stood to the Westward. In the evening some people
thought they saw the appearance of land to the Northward; but this
appear'd so improbable that I, who was not on deck at this time, was not
acquainted with it until dark, when I order'd them to sound, but found no
ground with 80 fathoms, upon which we concluded that no land was near.
But daylight in the Morning proved this to be a mistake by shewing us the
land at the distance of about 2 Leagues off. We had now the wind at
South-East, blowing fresh right upon the land. When we made the land we
were standing to the Westward; but, thinking the other the best tack to
get off on, we wore, and hauld off to the Eastward, and by Noon had got
an Offing of about 4 Leagues, the land at this time extending from
North-East by North to West-South-West. This part of the Coast of Africa
which we fell in with lies in about the Latitude of 32 degrees 0 minutes
South, and Longitude 331 degrees 29 minutes West, and near to what is
called in the Charts Point Nattall.* (* Natal.) It was a steep, craggy
point, very much broke, and looked as if the high, craggy rocks were
Islands. To the North-East of this point the land in General appear'd to
rise, sloping from the Sea to a Moderate height; the Shore, alternately
Rocks and Sands. About 2 Leagues to the North-East of the Point appear'd
to be the mouth of a River, which probably may be that of St. Johns. At
this time the weather was very hazey, so that we had but a very imperfect
view of the land, which did not appear to great advantage. Wind
South-South-West to South-East; course per Log North 31 degrees West;
distance 32 miles; latitude 31 degrees 5 minutes South per Observation,
31 degrees 7 minutes per Reckoning; longitude 331 degrees 19 minutes per
Observation, 324 degrees 56 minutes per Reckoning.

Wednesday, 6th. Moderate Gales, with hazey, rainy weather. Stood to the
Eastward all the day, having the land in sight, which at 4 p.m. extended
from North-East by North to South-West by West, distant 5 Leagues. At 6
in the Morning we could only see it at West distant 7 or 8 Leagues. At
Noon found the Ship by Observation 90 Miles to the Southward of account.
Thus far the current has carried us to the South since the last
observation, which was only 2 days ago; but it is plain, from the
position of the Coast, that we have been carried full as far to the West
also, notwithstanding we have been standing all the time to the
East-North-East* (* The ship was now in the Agulhas Current.) Wind
Southerly; course South 54 degrees East; distance 37 miles; latitude 32
degrees 4 minutes South; 330 degrees 44 minutes per Observation, 323
degrees 36 minutes per Reckoning.

Thursday, 7th. Cloudy, hazey weather; winds varying between the
South-West by South and South-East by South; a light breeze at 1 p.m.
Tack'd, and stood to the Westward, land at North, distant about 8
Leagues. At 6 saw it extending from North by West to West by North,
distant 5 or 6 Leagues; at 8 tack'd, and stood to the Eastward till 12;
then again to the Westward, standing 4 hours on one tack, and 4 on the
other. At Noon very cloudy; had no observation; saw the land extending
from North by West to West by North. Wind Southerly; course South 156
degrees 5 minutes West; distance 72 miles; latitude 32 degrees 54 minutes
South; longitude 331 degrees 56 minutes West per Observation, 323 degrees
54 per Reckoning.

Friday, 8th. In the P.M. stood to the Westward, with the wind at South by
West until 4 o'clock; then again to the Eastward, having the land in
sight, extending from North-North-East to West by North, distant 8
Leagues. At 12 the wind veer'd to the Eastward, and before Noon blow'd a
fresh breeze, with which we steer'd South-West. At 7, the land extending
from North-North-West to East-North-East, distant 10 or 12 Leagues, found
the Variation by the Amplitude to be 28 degrees 30 minutes West, and by
an Azimuth 28 degrees 8 minutes West. At Noon Latitude observ'd 34
degrees 18 minutes, which is 93 miles to the Southward of that given by
the Log, or dead reckoning since the last observation. Wind Easterly;
course South 39 1/2 degrees West; distance 109 miles; latitude 34 degrees
18 minutes South; longitude 333 degrees 19 minutes West per Observation,
324 degrees 23 minutes per Reckoning.

Saturday, 9th. A steady, fresh Gale, and settled weather. At 4 in the
P.M. had high land in sight, bearing North-East by North. At Noon had
little wind and clear weather; the observed Latitude 46 miles to the
Southward of the Log, which is conformable to what has hapned the 4
preceeding days; and by Observation made of the Sun and Moon this morning
found that the Ship had gain'd 7 degrees 4 minutes West of the Log since
the last observation, 13 days ago. Wind Ditto; course South 65 degrees
West; distance 210 miles; latitude 35 degrees 44 minutes South; longitude
337 degrees 6 minutes West per Observation, 326 degrees 53 minutes per
Reckoning.

Sunday, 10th. In the P.M. had a light breeze at North-East until 4
o'clock, when it fell calm, and continued so until 11, at which time a
breeze sprung up at West-North-West, with which we stood to the
Northward. In the Morning found the Variation to be 22 degrees 46
minutes; at Noon the observ'd Latitude was 14 Miles to the Northward of
the Log, which shews that the current must have shifted. Wind North-East
Westerly; course North 17 degrees 15 minutes West; distance 55 miles;
latitude 34 degrees 52 minutes South; longitude 337 degrees 25 minutes
West per Observation, 327 degrees 12 minutes per Reckoning.

Monday, 11th. First part light Airs at West; the remainder had a fresh
gale at South-East, with which we steer'd West and West-North-West, in
order to make the Land, which was seen from the Deck at 10 A.M. At Noon
it extended from North-East to North-West, distant 5 Leagues; the middle
appear'd high and mountainous, and the two Extremes low. Took several
Observations of the Sun and Moon, which gave the Longitude, reduced to
Noon, as per Column. Wind Ditto South-East; course North 85 degrees West;
distance 79 miles; latitude 34 degrees 45 minutes South; longitude 338
degrees 48 minutes West per Observation, 328 degrees 35 minutes per
Reckoning.

[Off Cape Agulhas.]

Tuesday, 12th. In the P.M. had the wind at South-East and East, with
which we steer'd along shore West and West-South-West. At 6 Cape
Laguillas* (* L'Agulhas.) bore West, distance 3 Leagues. At 8, the wind
being then at South, we tack'd and stood off, being about 2 Leagues from
the Cape, which bore about West-North-West. In this Situation had 33
fathoms water; the Wind continued between South-West and South all night,
in times very Squally, with rain. At 2 a.m. tacked to the Westward until
near 8, when we again stood off Cape Laguillas, North-West, distance 2 or
3 Leagues. At 9 the weather clear'd up, and the wind fix'd at South by
West. We tack'd, and stood to the Westward. At Noon Cape Laguillas bore
North-East by North, distant 4 Leagues. The land of this Cape is very low
and sandy next the Sea; inland it is of a moderate height. Latitude 34
degrees 50 minutes South, Longitude 339 degrees 23 minutes West, or 20
degrees 37 minutes East, deduced from Yesterday's Observations. Wind
East-South-East Southerly; course South 69 degrees 30 minutes West;
distance 37 miles; Latitude 34 degrees 58 minutes South; longitude 339
degrees 30 minutes per Observation, 329 degrees 17 minutes per Reckoning.

Wednesday, 13th. In the P.M., having the wind at South, we steer'd along
shore West by South 1/2 South until 3 o'clock, when, finding this course
carried us off from the land, we steer'd West by North; at 6 o'clock Cape
Laguillas, or the high land over it, bore East by North 12 Leagues
distance, and the westermost land in sight North-West 1/2 West. We
continued a West by North course, with the wind at South-East until day
light in the Morning, when we haul'd in North-West and North-West by
North; at 8 the Cape of Good Hope North-West by North, and at 10 we were
abreast of it, and distance off about 1 League or little more. We passed
close without a rock, on which the Sea broke very high; it lies about a
League right out to Sea from the Cape. After passing the Cape we kept
along shore at the distance of about 1 League off, having a fresh Gale at
South-East; at noon the Cape bore South-East, distance 4 Leagues.
Latitude observed 34 degrees 15 minutes South, Longitude in, by our
reckoning, corrected by the last observation, 341 degrees 7 minutes West,
or 18 degrees 53 minutes East from Greenwich, by which the Cape lies in
34 degrees 25 minutes South Latitude, and 19 degrees 1 minute East
Longitude from Greenwich, which nearly agrees with the observations made
at the Cape Town by Messrs. Mason and Dixon in 1761; a proof that our
observations have been well made, and that as such they may always be
depended upon to a surprizing degree of accuracey. If we had had no such
guide we should have found an error of 10 degrees 13 minutes of
Longitude, or perhaps more to the East, such an effect the current must
have had upon the ship.

Thursday, 14th. Winds at South-East, a fresh Gale, but as we approached
the Lyons Tail or West point, Table Bay, we had flurries of wind from all
Points of the Compass; this was occasioned by the high land, for clear of
it the wind was still at South-East, and bbow'd so strong out of the Bay
that we could not work the Ship in; we were therefore obliged to Anchor a
good way without all the Ships at Anchor in the Road, in the whole 16
Sail, viz., 8 Dutch, 3 Danes, 4 French, a Frigate, and 3 Store Ships, and
one English East Indiamen, who saluted us with 11 Guns; we returned 9.
The Gale continued, which obliged us to lay fast all the morning.

Friday, 15th. Strong Gales at South-East all the Afternoon and most part
of the Night, though in the Evening it fell a little moderate, which gave
the Indiaman's Boat an opportunity to come on board us, with a Complement
of a Basket of Fruit, etc,; she was the Admiral Pocock, Captain Riddell,
homeward bound from Bombay. In the morning we got under sail, and stood
into the Road, having variable light airs mostly from the Sea. A Dutch
boat from the Shore came on board, in which were the Master Attendant and
some other Gentlemen; the former directed us to a proper birth, where
about 10 o'clock we anchored in 7 fathoms water, a Ouzey bottom; the Lyon
Tail, or West point of the Bay, bore West-North-West, and the Castle
South-West, distance 1 1/2 miles. I now sent a Petty Officer on shore to
know if they would return our Salute, but before he return'd we Saluted,
which was immediately return'd with the same number of Guns; after this I
waited myself upon the Governour, who was pleased to tell me that I
should have everything I wanted that the place afforded. My first care
was to provide a proper place ashore for the reception of the Sick, for
which purpose I order'd the Surgeon to look out for a House where they
could be lodged and dieted. This he soon found, and agreed with the
people of the house for 2 shillings a day per man; which I found was the
customary Price and method of proceeding. I afterwards gave the Surgeon
an order to superintend the whole.

[Remarks on Dysentery.]

Few remarks have hapned since we left Java Head that can be of much use
to the Navigator, or any other Person, into whose hand this Journal may
fall; such, however, as have occur'd I shall now insert. After our
leaving Java head we were 11 days before we got the General South-East
Trade wind, in which time we did not advance above 5 degrees to the South
and 3 degrees to the West, having all the time Variable light Airs of
Wind, interrupted by frequent Calms, the weather all the time hot and
sultry, and the Air unwholesome, occasioned most probably by the Vast
Vapours brought into these Latitudes by the Easterly Trade wind and
Westerly Monsoons, both of which blow at this time of the Year in this
Sea. The Easterly winds prevail as far as 12 or 10 degrees South, and the
Westerly winds as far as 6 or 8 degrees; between them the winds are
Variable, and I believe always more or less unwholesome, but to us it was
remarkable from the Fatal Consequences that attended it, for whatever
might be the cause of First bringing on the Flux among our people, this
unwholesome Air had a Great share in it, and increased it to that degree
that a Man was no sooner taken with it than he look'd upon himself as
Dead. Such was the Despondency that reigned among the Sick at this time,
nor could it be by any Means prevented, when every Man saw that Medicine,
however skillfully Administered, had not the least effect. I shall
mention what Effect only the immaginary approach of this disorder had
upon one man. He had long tended upon the Sick, and injoyed a tolerable
good State of Health; one morning, coming upon Deck, he found himself a
little griped, and immediately began to stamp with his feet, and exclaim,
"I have got the Gripes, I have got the Gripes; I shall die, I shall die!"
In this manner he continued until he threw himself into a fit, and was
carried off the Deck, in a manner, Dead; however he soon recover'd, and
did very well.

We had no sooner got into the South-East Trade wind than we felt its
happy Effect, tho' we lost several men after, but they were such as were
brought so low and weak that there were hardly a possibility of there
recovery; and yet some of them linger'd out in a State of Suspence a
month after, who, in all Probability, would not have lived 24 Hours
before this Change hapned. Those that were not so far gone remained in
the same state for some time, and at last began to recover; some few,
however, were seized with the disorder after we got into the Trade wind,
but they had it but slightly, and soon got over it. It is worth
remarking, that of all those who had it in its last stage only one man
lived, who is now in a fair way of recovering; and I think Mr. Banks was
the only one that was cured at the first Attack'd that had it to a great
degree, or indeed at all, before we got into the South-East Trade, for it
was before that time that his Cure was happily effected.

It is to be wished, for the good of all Seamen, and mankind in general,
that some preventative was found out against this disease, and put in
practice in Climates where it is common, for it is impossible to Victual
and water a Ship in those Climates but what some one article or another,
according to different Peoples opinions, must have been the means of
bringing on the Flux. We were inclinable to lay it to the water we took
in at Princes Island, and the Turtle we got their, on which we lived
several days; but there seems to be no reason for this when we consider
that all the Ships from Batavia this Year suffer'd by the same disorder
as much as we have done, and many of them arrived at this place in a far
worse State; and yet not one of the Ships took any water in at Princes
Island. The same may be said of the Harcourt Indiaman, Captain Paul, who
sail'd from Batavia soon after our arrival, directly for the Coast of
Sumatra; we afterwards heard that she, in a very short time, lost by
Sickness above 20 men; indeed, this seem to have been a year of General
Sickness over most parts of India, the Ships from Bengal and Madrass
bring Melancholly Accounts of the Havock made there by the united force
of Sickness and famine.

Some few days after we left Java we saw, for 3 or 4 evenings succeeding
one another, boobies fly about the ship. Now, as these birds are known to
roost every night on land they seem'd to indicate that some Island was in
our neighbourhood; probably it might be the Island Selam, which Island I
